As a dive bar should, the Subway Inn smelled like stale beer and sweat one Thursday last month as a throng of well-wishers crowded three deep for a last hurrah.
The lease on the 77-year-old tavern on East 60th Street was set to expire; the owner, Arsemio Salinas, said he was told by the landlords to leave to make way for new development. A banner that read ''Save Subway Inn'' loomed above a group of 20-somethings snuggled into two tiny booths. Gloomy patrons milled around outside on the sidewalk across from Bloomingdale's.
It has become a familiar sight in New York: legendary bars shut down or forced to move, often replaced with new construction or trendy shops. Lulu's in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, which used to serve free pizza, closed in August. The Ding Dong Lounge on the Upper West Side closed this summer, too; its owner said the bar lost its lease. These shutdowns came on the heels of the closing earlier this year of Milady's, a grungy refuge from SoHo's boutiques and fancy hotels with their plush banquettes and pretty patrons.
''There is no appreciation for a dive bar anymore,'' said Paul Lyons, a lawyer who used to go to Subway Inn with friends when they worked at a nearby law firm.
Brooklyn particularly seems to have been hit in recent years as hipsters and the stroller brigade have taken to the borough in droves. Jackie's 5th Amendment in Park Slope, a working-class tavern famous for its buckets of beer, closed last year.
O'Connor's, another Park Slope institution since the 1930s, closed in 2012. Michael McMahon, the owner, said the tavern was overhauled and reopened last spring as McMahon's Public House, ditching the frayed barstools and adding a second-floor bar.
What many regulars at spots like Subway Inn or Milady's bemoan is the loss of familiarity in going to a bar that has been around a long time. ''A lot of things are dictated by fashion,'' said Linda Aro, who was with Mr. Lyons at Subway Inn. ''And this is all about community. People didn't really care what it looked like or what the quality of the beer was or the quality of the drinks. They wanted to be with a certain kind of person, be with people.''
The owners enjoy that, too. ''I know there is change,'' said Mr. Salinas, who is continuing his effort to keep the original bar open for a while. ''But this place is important to me.''
Even if a dive is able to relocate, it's hard to recreate decades-old atmosphere. The Emerald Inn on Columbus Avenue on the Upper West Side opened during World War II and closed last year because the rent became too expensive. Charles F. Campbell III, whose family owns the bar, said they had found another site, four blocks away on 72nd Street near West End Avenue. But that proved too far for some of the old patrons.
''Our clientele changed a lot,'' said Mr. Campbell in a phone interview. ''That trek across Broadway seems like a mile.'' Now, he said, the competition is a frozen yogurt shop and a juice bar.
''We have great food, a great story,'' Mr. Campbell said. ''But there is a Juice Generation down the street with a line around the block.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/18/fashion/a-sobering-future-for-new-yorks-dive-bars.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: From left, Steve Skulnik, Ariel Devine, Paul Lyons and Linda Aro toast the Subway Inn. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY TINA FINEBERG FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)