In the beginning, before air-conditioning and Miller Lite commercials, before 7-Eleven's and Kwik Stops, before Big Gulps and Slurpees, was the icehouse.
A product of the grueling summer heat and the relaxed South Texas culture, the icehouse is part beer joint, part convenience store, part community center, part Mexican, part German, part hot and part cold.
Aficionados here fear the icehouse will eventually go the way of block-long Cadillacs with steer horns on the hood. But on any summer afternoon or evening here 35 or 40 hardy survivors operate in a nicely frowzy way that gives San Antonio what the street cafe gives Paris or the coffee house gives Vienna.
''Anything that happens in human affairs happens in an icehouse,'' said Ron Zimmerman, a San Antonio filmmaker working with a politial science professor named Tom Denyer on a documentary about icehouse culture. ''They're the public living rooms of San Antonio. One man told us: 'A Stop & Go is just that. This is a stop and stay. You put down anchors here.' ''
 
Definitions Are Not Easy
The icehouse defies definition. All serve beer, but they are not beer joints. Some have music, but they are not dance halls. Most sell packaged food and ice, but they bear the same relationship to convenience stores that the icebox bears to the refrigerator.
Instead, they are neighborhood gathering places that grew up in the 1920's from businesses that were formed to sell and store ice. They offer convivial company, cold beer and an invitingly unpretentious decor that usually allows imbibing indoors or outdoors.
Icehouses are scattered throughout South Texas, but San Antonio is the acknowledged world capital.
At the Contreras Ice House, on the Hispanic West Side, patrons sit under a metal awning and drink beer overlooking Alazan Creek while the proprietors check patrons' needs with the help of mirrors. Its wall painting of a tuxedo-clad penguin handling a block of ice is classic icehouse art.
 
Country and Western Offered
At the Evans Ice & Grocery on the working-class Southside, regulars like to stand by the pastry counter filled with Butter Krust Dunkers and watch the Nashville Network on the tube.
At Hullaby's Ice House, in a black Eastside neighborhood, the big attraction is the regular domino game. Down the street at Stanley's Ice Station 6, where the sign reads, ''Welcome to coldest beer - coldest because on pure ice, not air-cooled,'' the big attraction is the curbside service for those who want to enjoy icehouse culture without leaving their cars.
A new and daring variation is Buddy's Ize Box just north of downtown. A traditional icehouse with yuppie trappings, it attracts longtime regulars who come in every day for afternoon beers and nearby college students who prefer the Eau Claire Spring Water and marinated artichoke salad.
Icehouses grew up as community institutions, catering at different times of the day to young people coming in for a Big Red soda and fathers coming for an after-work beer. Devotees speculate that the city's German and Mexican heritage, in which public beer drinking was viewed as an acceptable part of community life, helped icehouses catch on here in a way they did not in other hot locales.
 
'A Very Nice Place,' He Says
''I've been coming here for over 20 years,'' said Joaquin Davila, who is 85 years old, as he enjoyed his afternoon Budweiser at the Contreras Ice House. ''This is a very nice place, very friendly, not elegant, not fashionable, but a very nice place.''
The number of icehouses has dwindled steadily since the 1960's. ''They're classic small businesses, which makes them like dinosaurs,'' Mr. Denver said. ''You couldn't start one if you wanted to. What's there now is all there will ever be, and they're fading fast.''
Besides rising costs of real estate and of doing business, changes in community life have also hurt the icehouse business.
 
'Loyalty to Your Icehouse'
''When I was a kid, you had loyalty to your icehouse,'' said Roberto Pina, a program coordinator at the Mexican-American Cultural Center. ''It was part of your turf. The kids now want to go to some new club. There's not the sense of belonging there once was.''
But it is as hard to imagine San Antonio without icehouses as it would be without the Alamo. And even if no new ones are built, there appear to be buyers willing to keep old ones going.
''We used to come here when we were growing up,'' said Tony Torres, who bought the Contreras Ice House along with his friend Edward Hernandez this year. ''It's a part of our culture. If you come back in 40 years, you'll see the exact same thing here.''

Graphic

 
Photo of Contreras Ice House patrons (NYT/Zigy kaluzny); Photo of Joaquin (NYT)