THIS quaint corner of West Fourth and 10th Streets doesn't exactly conjure a sports bar, with its white French windows and sidewalk hedges. Some might recall its previous tenant, the faux speakeasy Charles, which went to absurd lengths to create exclusivity. But upscale sports bars are all the rage these days, and the Windsor does a commendable job keeping up.
At 4 p.m. on a December Sunday, a well-dressed group of football fans was gathering for the Cowboys-Colts game. There was not a single jersey-wearing, beer-swilling, working-class lout in sight. Instead, the real action took place off screen, when a gaggle of 20-something female publicists, dressed in fitted cashmere, fur vests and ultra-high heels, strolled in during the first quarter and struck up a conversation with a table of 30-something bankers dressed down in flannel shirts.
THE PLACE It is a sports bar, so there are lots of flat-screen TVs -- hanging from walls, behind the bar, even in the individual red-leather booths. But the Windsor could also pass for an Ivy League clubhouse, with its pinstriped wallpaper, old wooden paddles and vintage photographs of New York.
THE CROWD The preppy patrons could have been plucked from a Ralph Lauren ad: wholesome and happy, with rosy cheeks and curly locks. Almost without exception, they wore nice sweaters. The guys and girls (oh, yes, there are plenty of the latter in this sports bar) seemed to prefer snifters of Glenlivet over bottles of Bud Light. And with the exception of an occasional ''Yes!'' and hints of a fist pump, they sipped with civility.
PLAYLIST At night, an iPod churns out crowd-pleasing rock 'n' roll. On weekend days, the only sound comes from television sets tuned to sports.
GETTING IN Just walk in. The owners insist that they cater first and foremost to their West Village neighbors, though ZIP codes from farther uptown seemed to be better represented.
DRINKS Although there are beers on tap, like Spaten Ocktoberfest, Stella and Brooklyn IPA ($8 each), this place is about wines and cocktails. House drinks include the Half Windsor, a crisp martini of Hendrick's gin, yuzu, cucumber juice and rose-water spritz ($14). The Windsor also has high-end snacks, like grilled cheese with truffles ($20).
The Windsor, 234 West Fourth
Street (West 10th Street); (212) 206-1208;
thewindsornyc.com. Open daily. LEANNE SHEAR

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: TEAM SPORT: At the Windsor, the action happens onscreen and off. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY MICHAEL NAGLE FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)