There is a set of "rules for fun" on Imagination Island:
Treat everyone the way you want to be treated, a sign says at the entrance.
Take turns, be fair.
Share.
Always show your best manners.
And in green capital letters, the sign reads: "PLEASE HELP MAKE THE PLAYGROUND LAST FOREVER."
The residents and business owners who built the wooden play structure slat by slat thought the final rule might be the most appropriate. They saw the park, once the pride of their working-class community, nearly burn to the ground last fall. The work of arsonists who were never caught, they said.
But they were determined to rebuild, even if they had to spend months on the project.
This week, the park will be alive with children once again, Morrisville Borough Manager George Mount said. The community plans to celebrate its reopening on Saturday with games and local musicians at Oktoberfest.
"At last," said Eileen Dreisbach, the chairman of the borough recreation advisory board. "Our kids will have their park back. They'll have a place to go and run off some energy."
Dreisbach said community members who raised $100,000 for supplies to build the original playground, which opened in October 1995, were shocked by the fire in September 2001.
"We put in so many hours and so much love into giving the Morrisville children a place where they could run and play," Dreisbach said. "It was absolutely devastating to this community when the park burned down."
There were constant reminders. Driving by on Route 32, residents could see the ruins for months. Some wondered whether the park would ever be rebuilt. But behind the scenes, Dreisbach said, borough officials were planning its rebirth. There was a long process of finding a contractor, buying lumber, and processing the insurance claim.
Then, in the spring, a swingset emerged.
And a small slide.
Lots of things to climb.
"Everything came together," Mount said.
In the last few days, workers were drilling and hammering the wooden village, putting the last touches on the playland.
"We're glad it's fixed," Dreisbach said.
She plans to celebrate by bringing her grandchildren to the reopening.
"Lots of things to smile about," Dreisbach said.
The resurrection of Imagination Island will show the arsonists that the community could overcome its own obstacles, she said.
"I just pray that this doesn't happen again," she said.
Contact Amie Parnes at 215-702-7817 or aparnes@phillynews.com.