WASHINGTON -- With every fire siren, people in the eastern neighborhoods of the nation's capital flinch.
An arsonist is targeting houses in working-class neighborhoods within a few miles of the Capitol. Doors and porches are doused before sunrise with a flammable liquid and set on fire. An 86-year-old woman has been killed and seven people have been injured in 24 suspicious fires in the city and a close-in Maryland suburb. There is no suspect.
"We can't say male or female, old or young," Fire Chief Ron Blackwell of Prince George's County, Md., says of the arsonist's profile. Blackwell, who heads a task force investigating the fires, offered a $ 20,000 reward for Tuesday and urged citizens to report anything out of place. And he vowed that the arsonist would be caught.
Arsons, however, are notoriously difficult to solve. Much of the evidence is consumed in the fire. An arsonist can escape before a fire grows large enough to trigger smoke detectors. Nationwide, only 16% of arson cases are solved each year. Washington investigators solved about 17% last year.
The arsonist is the latest assault on a region that has been on edge the past two years. In October, two snipers terrorized the area. They killed 10 people and wounded three others in their random attacks. Residents stayed at home for fear of becoming a target at school, the shopping center or gas station. Security remains tight after the Sept. 11 terrorist attack on the Pentagon and anthrax mailings to lawmakers that followed. Every time the U.S. terrorism alert is raised, there is anxiety.
The rash of fires has yet to create the scare that the snipers did. But homeowners have become more vigilant ---- and angry ---- as the arsonist remains at large. To calm fear, police and fire officials have had several neighborhood meetings in the last month. But for some, fear persists.
Sharon Lightfoot, whose mother Lou Edna Jones, 86, was killed in one of the suspicious fires June 5, cringed when told that fire destroyed a garage early Tuesday. Investigators later said that fire was not tied to the string of arsons.
"Here we go again, I thought. Every time you hear about a fire now, my first thought is, 'Is it this wacko again?' " Lightfoot said. Lightfoot, 49, who lives in southeast Washington, said she is angry that fire officials didn't alert homeowners as the list of suspicious fires grew. Although investigators now suspect that the arsonist may have struck first in March, they did not link any of the fires until June.
"We didn't hear about it until the fire that killed my mother," she said. "I'm quite sure not only my mother but everyone else maybe would've done something a little different, maybe put an extra light on the porch."
Norman Evans, 55, who lives a block from Tuesday's garage fire, said he may stay up at night to keep watch out his back window. "That's just too close for comfort," he said. "Makes everyone around here nervous."
Investigators have linked six of the 24 suspicious fires. The 18 others are "similar nature" and are being investigated as the work of the arsonist, they said. They also are now revisiting the scenes of several other fires as far back as March to see if they are linked.
Investigators are troubled that the targets are homes.
"The individual we're looking at is wanting to make a statement," said David Sneed, president of the International Association of Arson Investigators. "When you set fire to a vacant house, that's one thing. When you go set the fire at the front door of an occupied structure, your threat is to the people in the house."

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, B/W, Robert W. Ahrens, USA TODAY, Source: Prince George's County Fire Department (MAP); PHOTOS, B/W, Tim Dillon, USA TODAY (2); Memorial to victim: Lou Edna Jones, 86, was killed in a suspicious fire June 5 at this house in northeast Washington. <>Lightfoot: Information too late.