Stunned residents joined rescue teams today in digging for those pinned under wreckage from an earthquake a day earlier - the strongest to hit Athens in nearly a century. The 10-second shudder claimed at least 36 lives and left close to 100 missing.
As dawn broke, engineering crews began fanning out through Athens' hard-struck northern suburbs. State media said rescue crews were working to free 84 people trapped in 28 flattened apartment buildings or factories.
The scenes of desperate searches and survivors too frightened to return indoors were sadly familiar - last month's monstrous quake in neighboring Turkey had moved many Greeks to put aside their historical enmity with Turks and mobilize aid.
But some significant differences came to light in the shared disasters.
Decades of progressively stricter building codes in Greece allowed Athens to ride out Tuesday's 5.9-magnitude temblor with much less misery than western Turkey, where shoddy construction was blamed for the near total destruction of some places after the 7.4-magnitude quake on Aug. 17.
"Damage like we saw in Turkey is difficult to occur here with the modern buildings we have," said Manolis Skordilis, head of the Thessaloniki Seismological Institute.
Most of the damage and casualties were concentrated in working-class and immigrant areas north of Athens, where construction standards were apparently lower or builders used shortcuts, some officials suggested. More than 100 buildings collapsed, from multistory apartment houses to factories, and hundreds more were left with cracks or crumbled facades.
Officials today began setting up more than 700 tents around Menidi, where the quake was centered. Thousands of Athenians fearing a new quake spent the night in the city parks as aftershocks rattled the capital throughout the night.
Officials reported more than 500 aftershocks, including eight over magnitude 4 and a midnight jolt that registered magnitude 4.7.
Experts said the strong aftershocks were an indication that the energy built up along the fault line was abating to safe levels.
Hundreds of rescue workers - some who looked for survivors in Turkey - were joined by residents atop piles of rubble. Spotlights illuminated areas as work pressed on through the muggy night.
State television reported at least 36 people dead, including several young children. Most of the victims were crushed and a few suffered fatal heart attacks.
The exact number of missing was unclear, but state media said about two dozen people were trapped in flattened apartment buildings. An estimated 40 workers were missing in a collapsed foam-products factory north of Athens, and about a dozen employees were reported under the rubble of an appliance-manufacturing site.
In central Athens, there was no apparent damage to ancient sites, including the Acropolis and the towering columns of the Temple of Zeus.
But streets throughout the capital of more than five million people were littered with signs of the quake's power: chunks of concrete, glass shards and shattered marble that had rained down on people who raced from offices and homes in the middle of a workday.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Alexandros Tsironis kisses his daughter Sophia, 5, after being rescued by firefighters from the wreckage of a five-story apartment building in the Athens district of Menidi. More than 100 buildings collapsed yesterday. (DIMITRI MESSINIS, Associated Press)
A female employee of the Faran pharmaceutical company is rescued from a collapsed building in the northern Athens suburb of Metamorphosis after a 10-second earthquake. Yesterday's quake was the city's strongest in 85 years. (YIORGOS KARAHALIS, Reuters)