TITLE: Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie Revisit 'The Simple Life'
TOPIC: Art
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-12-11 00:00:00
SECTION: ARTS; television
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/1.DOCX
LABEL: ['Family', 'Art']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
The celebutantes-turned-businesswomen are rebooting the show that provided a blueprint for the past 20 years of reality TV.
How would two troubled Los Angeles heiresses manage as members of the Bible Belt working class?
The answer helped revolutionize reality TV and legitimized the careers of Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie. In 2003, the pair of 22-year-olds debuted in Fox's "The Simple Life," which documented their move to Altus, Ark., to live with a family on their farm and try out blue collar jobs.
Hilton and Richie brought rich-girl haughtiness and high jinks to mundane tasks like cleaning hotel rooms and, in one memorable episode, serving burgers at a Sonic Drive-In. The result was a quotable megahit — with heart. "Their fish-out-of-water ineptitude serves as a social leveler that gives them their comeuppance and preserves the dignity of their rural hosts," Alessandra Stanley wrote in a review for The New York Times. Unlike the other popular reality programs of the time, like "Big Brother" and "Survivor," the allure of "The Simple Life" didn't come from a wild premise or shocking competition: The personalities of and friendship between Hilton and Richie were the drawing card. That recipe has been built upon in subsequent reality franchises like "Keeping Up With the Kardashians," "Jersey Shore" and "The Real Housewives."
More than two decades later, the two are appearing in "Paris & Nicole: Encore," a three-part reboot which is primarily set in L.A. and involves activities and outings a bit closer to home. It will air on Peacock beginning Thursday. Though the show centers on the pair's staging of an opera based on "sanasa," a made-up word which fans might remember as a mainstay joke on the original, Hilton and Richie also revisit Altus, Sonic and the friendship that made their show riveting TV.
Ahead of the "Encore" premiere, we talked to Hilton and Richie about how reality TV has changed since "The Simple Life," the impact of social media on the genre and the shows they're enjoying now.
Here are edited excerpts from the conversation.
You were some of the first reality TV stars, and now it is an oversaturated industry. How do you think the landscape has changed since "The Simple Life" first aired?
NICOLE RICHIE We didn't say yes to doing the show to build our brand or get exposure for something else in our business. We really said yes to this show because we wanted to have fun and we wanted to be together. We actually had no information about the show. We didn't even know what city we were going to. We had no idea. We were just up for an adventure. We were just, like, down to laugh, you know? We had no idea that it was going to take off and be in, you know, multiple seasons or anything like that.
In the early days of reality TV, even with "Jersey Shore," which came later, the cast members didn't really know what they were signing up for. And that was the beauty of it.
RICHIE In 2024, it can lead to so many other things. That was not on our minds at all. We were, you know, 20 and just wanting to live, laugh, love.
PARIS HILTON There was nothing really to compare it to. So we had no idea what we were getting ourselves into. We were just doing it because we love having fun together, going on adventures —
RICHIE We wanted to leave town and go for it.
Do you think that the prominence of technology and social media has helped or hindered the genre?
RICHIE A show like "The Simple Life" could never exist now, because the whole point of that show was that we didn't have phones, we had no access to the outside world at all and that was something that I think really stood out about the show and the times in which we did it. We had no idea what was going on with our family or our friends back home.
How did your experience filming "Paris & Nicole: Encore" differ from your experience on "The Simple Life?"
RICHIE It was very different just in the sense of we were clocking in and clocking out every day, so we were not out of town. I'd say the biggest difference is that when we did "The Simple Life," we were signing up to do someone else's show. And "Encore" is a show that we created, that we produced, and we just had a lot of fun doing it.
You both have lots of your own ventures, could you see yourselves coming back to reality TV more long-term?
RICHIE "The Simple Life" was all about us leaving our lives and stepping into other people's. So, you know, we did always maintain a certain level of privacy and protection just within our own lives. That show was really special, I love it so much. It would be impossible for us to do it again just because, you know, we're now real adults. We've got careers and families. And it's just not possible.
What advice would you give to younger people quickly gaining prominence after appearing on a reality show?
HILTON I think it's important to definitely just be very aware of everything that you post. And if you want to parlay that into a brand or building a product line or something, that's something important as well to really figure out what you want to do, get the correct team to make it happen and try to capitalize on it, to do something with it.
What reality show or shows are you currently loving?
HILTON "The Simple Life," it's a great show. I love to watch it all the time, been watching it with my kids.
How do they feel watching it with you?
HILTON My little baby boy, he just, like, sits there and he's like, "Mama, mama." He just, like, watches and laughs. And now he's learned our song "Sanasa" and sings it all the time. And it's just the cutest thing in the world just to hear him singing in his little baby voice.
What about you, Nicole?
RICHIE I didn't watch the whole season, but I did see a few episodes of "The Golden Bachelor," and I loved it. I found it to be extremely moving to see people in these different stages in later stages in their lives that want to take a new chapter and put themselves out there. I thought that was entertaining and really nice.
PHOTOS: Top, Paris Hilton, left, and Nicole Richie stage an opera based on their made-up word "sanasa," in "Paris & Nicole: Encore," on Peacock. On a 2005 episode of "The Simple Life," Richie, left, and Hilton with Captain Evans at a fire station in Atlantic City, N.J. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY CHRISTINE BARTOLUCCI/PEACOCK; MICHAEL YARISH/FOX) This article appeared in print on page C7.