TITLE: Dubai
TOPIC: Art
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-12-14 00:00:00
SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Travel Desk; Pg. 8
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/1.DOCX
LABEL: ['Housing', 'Art', 'Sports']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
Friday
4 p.m. | Ride an elevator to the future 
  In Dubai's skyscraper-filled financial district, life in the year 2071 is imagined inside the interactive Museum of the Future. The seven-story structure, which was designed with the help of an algorithm, is shaped like a human eye and engraved in Arabic calligraphy. Lift off to an imagined space station in an elevator simulating commercial space travel, press a button to watch nature come to life in a digital recreation of the Amazonian rainforest, browse a DNA library of thousands of species and check out a flying school bus. If you come across a resident robot (like a penguin ''flying'' above, or a roving dog), wave to start an interaction. Entry, 149 dirhams, or about $40.50.
  7 p.m. | Grab a drink and shisha to taste a world gone by
  Walk a short distance to the Jumeirah Emirates Tower to relax among vines and palm trees at Ninive, an alfresco cocktail lounge that is an urban reimagination of the Hanging Gardens of Babylon. In alcoves made from brass and wood, under dancing lantern lights, settle into cushions woven in geometric Al Sadu fabric and sip a cocktail infused with tamarind (80 dirhams) while sharing a plate of za'atar chickpea dip (60 dirhams) and shisha (flavored tobacco smoked through a water pipe; 160 dirhams). The experience is something of a mix between a majlis (Arabian sitting room) and a caravanserai (the style of inns dotting land routes along the ancient Silk Road). Note that it is illegal to drink alcohol in public, but permitted in licensed restaurants, hotels and bars.
  9 p.m. | Eat at a hidden Japanese-style listening bar
  A 15-minute drive south in downtown Dubai, at the Pullman Hotel, hidden behind a record store and past a dark vestibule narrower than a pair of shoulders, is Honeycomb Hi-Fi. In the dimly lit dining room, inspired by Japanese listening bars, enjoy izakaya-style dishes like seaweed salad (46 dirhams) or chicken yakitori skewers (55 dirhams) with cocktails made with Roku gin and sake (65 to 80 dirhams) to a soundtrack of sets by D.J.s from Lebanon, Egypt and Sudan. In an anteroom is an art gallery currently showing photographs documenting the sound systems of the cumbia music scene in Latin America.
  Saturday
  10 a.m. | Walk around the historic heart of the city
  Learn about traditional Emirati life in Al Fahidi Historical Neighborhood, an oasis of old-world charm. Wander along winding stone pathways, push open heavy teak doors into homes originally occupied by pearl merchants, climb up to wind towers with small windows that open into the canopies of trees. Stop by Bayt Al Khanyar Museum (admission, 5 dirhams), which showcases a collection of ceremonial Emirati daggers. Next door, at the Coffee Museum (10 dirhams), sample Arabic coffee and browse ancient roasting and brewing tools. Explore the adjoining Al Fahidi Souk, where vendors sell shawls, herbs, saffron, and knockoff designer bags and watches, and take in views of Dubai Creek, which is dotted with charming dhows, or sailboat taxis.
  2 p.m. | Tuck into a vegetarian thali
  Take a taxi 10 minutes west to Karama, a working-class neighborhood of low-rise buildings with saris and pajamas hung to dry, and follow the aroma of ghee into Maharaja Bhog, a multicourse, all-you-can-eat restaurant with the ambience of an Indian wedding party that specializes in vegetarian thali, a platter featuring many small dishes (59 dirhams per adult). Wash your hands in a copper bowl that is brought to your table and take in the cheerful chaos of clinking spoons, the hiss of frying oil and laughter over the hum of classical Indian music. A rotating cast of waiters appears, swinging serving bowls over your head and doling out shallow pools of chutney alongside a selection of curries, dals, roti and rice from the western Indian states of Rajasthan and Gujarat.
  4 p.m. | Explore contemporary art
  Head south to Alserkal Avenue, a cultural district where you can browse art in a cluster of warehouses that were part of a former marble factory. Look for the public art installation of makeshift shelters by the Palestinian artist Dima Srouji, which is spread along the avenue (through Feb. 26). Stop by the Leila Heller gallery to see abstract paintings by the Lebanese artist Marwan Sahmarani (through Jan. 15), and explore the tantric symbolism of paintings by the Indian artist Sohan Qadri at 1X1 Art Gallery (through Jan. 9). At Cinema Akil, a retro art-house cinema with mismatched couches and vintage posters, catch a screening of an international short (56 dirhams). Afterward, shop a collection of prints, film cameras and books at Gulf Photo Plus and stop by Nappa Dori for gorgeous Indian leather goods.
  8 p.m. | Eat seafood by the harbor
  Choose your dinner adventure. Dig into salmon carpaccio, yellowtail sushi and Indomie instant noodles mixed with beef chorizo at 3Fils, a diner by the Jumeirah Fishing Harbor, while taking in the breeze and the view of fishing boats and Jet Skis on the water. No alcohol, no reservations (the line moves quickly); dinner for two, around 200 dirhams. Or join a river of traffic turning into Antar or Al Ijaza Cafeteria, both near Jumeirah Beach Road, two beloved, neon-lit fast-food storefronts serving shawarma, porotta flatbreads rolled around kebabs and milky chai since the 1990s, before the homogenizing bulldozer of global food chains arrived. Try the hassan mathar (9 dirhams), a pocket sandwich with spit-roasted chicken, cheese, fries and hot sauce.
  Sunday
  7 a.m. | Bike through the desert
  Watch the sun come up over the vast Al Marmoom Desert as you bike along Al Qudra Cycle Track, a 30-minute drive or Uber ride east from the city center. Rent a bike at Trek Bicycle Store (166 dirhams for two hours) at the start of the dedicated cycling path, which has loops suitable for various levels of riders and groups, and is equipped with rest stops and water stations. The thrill of riding past undulating dunes, ghaf trees and date palms, glimpsing Arabian oryxes (native long-horned antelopes) and camels in the wild will make waking early worth it. Stop for rest roughly four miles in at Al Qudra Lakes, an oasis that attracts migratory birds including flocks of flamingos. Take in the sounds of families stretching out on picnic mats, peeling fruit with pocket knives and humming songs.
  11 a.m. | Have a Palestinian brunch
  Wipe off the dust and head west to Mama'esh, a Palestinian restaurant in the Al Manara neighborhood that feels like a family's living room, with walls covered in photographs, artifacts and mementos of daily life in the West Bank, East Jerusalem and Gaza. There is a ticker announcing prayer times and a shelf crowded with herbs and recipe books. Mama'esh specializes in manakish, the traditional flatbread baked in stone ovens with olive oil sourced from Palestinian villages and topped with za'atar, cheese or meat. Try the foul medammas (spiced fava beans), cheese manakish with hummus, and a stew of spiced eggplant, lentils and pomegranates. Brunch for two, around 100 dirhams.
  Noon | Take a boat out
  Hire a yacht, staffed with a crew, which costs surprisingly less of an arm and a leg than it sounds (450 dirhams an hour for up to 10 adults and children with Everest Yacht Charter; minimum rental is two hours). You'll leave behind the hustle of the city, drawn toward the lull of the sea as you taste the salt in the air and take in the skyline from a different perspective, cruising past the sail-shaped Burj Al Arab hotel; the palm-shaped, artificial islands of Palm Jumeirah; and the Arabian archway of the Atlantis hotel. Bring along a portable speaker to play your own music, as well as your brunch leftovers and swimwear and a change of clothes so you can anchor midsea and jump into the water.

https://www.nytimes.com/2024/12/10/travel/14hours-dubai-print.html

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Aboard a boat at the Dubai Marina. Top and center left, the Museum of the Future. Center right, the Coffee Museum. Above left, a traditional lunch served at the Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum Center for Cultural Understanding. Above, riding past sand dunes and date palms on the Al Qudra bicycle track. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY KATARINA PREMFORS FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES) This article appeared in print on page C8.