TITLE: Sherrod Brown Signs Off in the Senate. For Now.
TOPIC: Union
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-12-17 00:00:00
SECTION: US
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/1.DOCX
LABEL: ['Union', 'Election', 'Indebtedness']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.9999964473853282]

BODY:
Ohio's senior Democratic senator told colleagues that despite his defeat, he was not done with politics just yet.
Like other senators leaving the chamber next month, Senator Sherrod Brown, Democrat of Ohio, on Tuesday marked the end of his three terms with an emotional, highly personal floor speech. But he refused to call it a farewell.
"It is not — I promise you — the last time you will hear from me," Mr. Brown assured his applauding colleagues as he concluded remarks that caused him to choke up several times.
In an interview, Mr. Brown, 72, a progressive labor champion in the Senate since 2007, would not say what form his future political activism might take, raising the prospect of a potential institute on "the dignity of work" — a signature issue for him.
But he also would not rule out running for office back in Ohio or trying to return to the Senate in two years, when a special election is scheduled to be held to fill the unexpired term of JD Vance, the Republican who will resign his seat to become vice president in January.
No matter what the future holds, Mr. Brown said he intended to try to refocus his party on working-class issues.
"I'm going to stay engaged," Mr. Brown, currently the chairman of the Banking Committee, said in the interview. "I lost. First time I've lost in a long, long time. I am not walking away at all from advocating for workers."
"My goal is to make the Democratic Party the party of workers," he added. "A whole lot of voters in Ohio see the Democratic Party as a bicoastal party, and those days need to be behind us."
Like other Democratic Senate contenders, Mr. Brown ran well ahead of Vice President Kamala Harris in November's general election but he could not overtake Bernie Moreno, the Republican who will assume the seat in January.
Still, Mr. Brown, who was once considered a potential presidential candidate, has received encouragement from his Democratic colleagues to try to come back to the Senate in two years in the midterms, when the political environment traditionally favors the party out of power. He retains a strong political base in the state and has widespread name recognition.
Returning to the Senate after losing an election has proved difficult but not impossible. Slade Gorton, Republican of Washington, was elected in 1980, lost in 1986 and then returned to the Senate by winning in 1988. But in another recent example, Senator Russ Feingold, Democrat of Wisconsin, lost to his Republican opponent, Ron Johnson, in 2010 and again in 2016.
Senator Bob Casey of Pennsylvania, another defeated Democratic incumbent who, like Mr. Brown, was first elected to the Senate in 2006, has told media outlets in his state that he is not ruling out a potential political comeback. But he might have to wait a full six years for a Senate rematch, since the other Pennsylvania seat is held by a Democrat, John Fetterman.
As his time in Congress winds down, Mr. Brown is on the cusp of a potentially significant victory. The Senate is nearing a vote on a plan he has sponsored with Senator Susan Collins, Republican of Maine, to restore full Social Security benefits to public employees such as teachers and firefighters whose payments are reduced because they receive other public pensions. It passed the House overwhelmingly and could clear the Senate this week.
In the Senate, Mr. Brown is known for pushing for a higher child tax credit and pension protection, and was an early opponent of the North American Free Trade Agreement and other trade deals that he said punished American workers while rewarding Wall Street at labor's expense. No wonder, he said, many Americans think the system is rigged against them.
"For half a century, the stock market soared, executive compensation exploded, corporate profits have risen dramatically, worker productivity has gone up, but workers' wages have been comparatively flat and costs keep going up," he said.
"Until we solve that fundamental problem in this country," he added, "until hard work is valued, until everyone has a path to the middle class and the stability and security of a good-paying job, our work in this body — my work as a private citizen come January — that work is unfinished."
PHOTO: Senator Sherrod Brown, who was once considered a potential presidential candidate, has received encouragement from his Democratic colleagues to try to come back to the Senate in two years in the midterms. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Haiyun Jiang for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)