TITLE: An English City Dressed a Statue as Santa for Years. Then It Vanished.
TOPIC: Housing
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-12-24 00:00:00
SECTION: WORLD; europe
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/1.DOCX
LABEL: ['Housing', 'Sports', 'Business Ownership']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.9999829078397681]

BODY:
At six feet, the statue was taller than the man ever was. Carved roughly from limestone, his large shoulders hunched under a bright red jacket, the likeness of the man known as the Old General had held its perch in Nottingham, England, for nearly a century, suspended in a display window above the front door of the local pub.
From there, the statue had watched the world change around him. He was placed there at the start of Nottingham's 19th-century industrial heyday, but by the mid-2010s the English Midlands city, once powered by coal mining and manufacturing, had reinvented itself.
Modern flats dotted the streets. New offices and corporations had moved in. And the pub that housed the Old General statue and shared its name, in the center of the working-class Hyson Green neighborhood, had closed.
Still, through ups and downs, and as economic headwinds shuttered many local watering holes, the statue endured. Every Christmas, for as long as anyone could remember, residents dressed him as Santa Claus, filling his glass display window with twinkling lights and draping his stone shoulders in red velvet. To many longtime residents of Nottingham, the Old General's robing signaled the start of the Christmas season.
"It is a landmark," said Steve Oliver, a Nottingham native. "Something that's ingrained in people's memories."
For a while, even after the pub closed in 2009, the Christmas tradition continued and the statue remained, tended to by diligent locals who saw its upkeep as part of their community's disappearing traditions.
Then, in 2016, the Old General disappeared, too. 
Born sometime around 1780, the real Old General — a man named Benjamin Mayo — lived his entire life in Nottingham. He came of age alongside his town, which became part of England's industrial boom.
Mayo was four feet tall and walked with a hunch, according to local lore. He made a small income hawking newspapers to Nottingham's workmen and, in his downtime, commanded a brigade of young hellions, whom he led as they performed innocent high jinks around town. His penchant for wearing old military garb earned him his moniker.
He died in 1843, but four decades later, when a pub opened at the corner of Radford and Bobber's Mill Roads, the proprietor named it the Old General. It soon boasted a rudimentary stone statue of Mayo, set prominently in a display window above the bar's front door.
The likeness survived the turn of the century, World War II and Nottingham's postwar renaissance, as the demand for coal from mines near the city drove an industrial and cultural boom.
But in a script that played out in many parts of Britain, the area's mines began closing in the second half of the 20th century, and most of the factories left, too. Raleigh Bicycles, one of the city's prized exports, stopped production in Nottingham in 2003. John Player and Sons cigarettes, which had produced rolled tobacco in the city for more than a century, left in 2016.
"We were sort of left to rot," said Lisa McKenzie, a professor who studies Britain's working class and was raised in Nottingham by a coal miner and a factory worker. "There was no plan, no plan at all on what would happen to us."
The Old General pub went through several ownership changes before closing for good in 2009. The window in which the statue had stood for more than 100 years was boarded over.
It signaled a broader trend in Britain's pub scene. Watering holes began shuttering en masse around 2010, according to the Campaign for Real Ale, or CAMRA, a commercial group that lobbies for pubs, which blamed taxes and rising costs, among other factors.
The coronavirus pandemic and changes in drinking patterns have calcified such trends. The British Beer and Pub Association, a lobbying organization, said 530 pubs closed in 2023, and 48 more in the first quarter of 2024, and called such figures worrying for Britain's economic and social fabric.
"The pub is still the great leveler," said Emma McClarkin, the association's chief executive. "A lord and a bricklayer rubbing shoulders, sharing a drink — that is a social value that they have to believe in."
Mr. Oliver, 48, the longtime Nottingham resident, noticed immediately when the statue of the Old General' disappeared from sight behind the pub's boarded-up window. He cheekily began passing around missing persons fliers featuring pictures of it.
It worked, briefly: The boards came down, and the owner let Mr. Oliver in to dress the statue for Christmas.
But under yet another new owner, the building was locked up in 2011, the statue covered by a metal grate. It stayed there until 2015, when a developer bought the site to turn it into shops and apartments.
The news set off alarm bells through Hyson Green. Soon, people noticed that the figure behind the grates had disappeared. The developer promised that the statue would be preserved, and displayed in the redeveloped site.
"It is in a secret location," Derek Francis, a representative for the developer, told the BBC in 2016. "But it is safe."
There was no public sign of the statue for years. Hyson Green continued changing. The pub became an apartment building. The development company, which could not be reached, appeared to have changed hands.
"We'd always wondered," Andrew Ludlow, the secretary for Nottingham's chapter of CAMRA, the pub lobbying group, said of the statue. "Everybody sort of remembers that they think he should be somewhere, but nobody knows exactly where he is."
Then, in February, a CAMRA member was wandering the cluttered backyard of a charity shop next to the former pub when he noticed a large, precarious-looking plywood box, its panels green with mildew. The man asked what was in it.
Oh, a shop employee said, that's the Old General.
He summoned other members of the group, and not long after that they stood in the backyard and pried open a piece of the rotting plywood. There, wobbly but still standing, was the likeness of Benjamin Mayo. The Old General hadn't gone so far after all.
CAMRA members have since found the statue a new home. Castle Rock, a local brewery, paid to move it to another pub, the Vat and Fiddle. Then, a former bartender from the Old General reported that she had rescued some of the pub's memorabilia, including an old print of the statue, from a dumpster when it first closed. They have since joined the statue at the Vat and Fiddle.
The community has celebrated the statue's reappearance, said Ms. McKenzie, the Nottingham-raised professor, because it offers a link to a fast-changing city's past.
"When the sense of who you are is lost, that's the thing that people hold on to the most," she said. "If that starts to be removed, you become nothing. And I think that is what has happened to these sorts of places."
This Christmas season, the pub celebrated Benjamin Mayo's return with a ceremony, dressing him once again in his red velvet best.
"We can continue the journey," said Colin Wilde, the managing director of Castle Rock, "and start writing its next chapters."
PHOTO: The Old General after being liberated from a charity shop. Its new home is the Vat and Fiddle pub in Nottingham, England. (PHOTOGRAPH BY PETE MCWILLIAM/CASTLE ROCK BREWERY) This article appeared in print on page A6.