LONDON -- Three months after a Northern Ireland political agreement
that was billed as ending 30 years of sectarian conflict, "peace"
in the British-ruled province is looking an awful lot like war.
Flaming barricades block traffic. Mobs hurl Molotov cocktails
at police. Protestant and Catholic leaders warn darkly of the
likelihood of more violence.
The trigger for the latest unrest was a decision June 29 by an
independent commission to prohibit a Protestant group from marching
through a Catholic neighborhood in Portadown, near Belfast.
When the local chapter of the Protestant Orange Order tried to
walk from its church at Drumcree down the Catholic Garvaghy Road
on Sunday, members found the route barred by a concrete-and-steel
barrier and 2,000 police and soldiers.
Thursday, Orangemen met with British Prime Minister Tony Blair
to urge they be allowed through. Blair refused.
The emotion on display this week demonstrates one thing: The "Good
Friday" agreement didn't deliver peace; it delivered only a blueprint
for peace. Three decades of killing and centuries of sectarian
hatred have left wounds that no document can heal quickly.
With the standoff in its fifth day, there were signs of escalating
tensions. David McNarry, a leader of the Portadown protest, said
Protestants could "paralyze the country in a matter of hours"
if they so chose. Two years ago, Protestants did just that, blocking
roads and forcing the closure of the international airport.
The confrontation could intensify this weekend, as Protestants
commemorate the Battle of the Boyne, a military victory in 1690
by the Protestant William of Orange over his Catholic rival, King
James I.
Bonfires will be lit Sunday night in working-class Protestant
neighborhoods. And Monday, a Belfast Orange Lodge has been given
the OK to march through a Catholic neighborhood.
"Things are pretty tense . . . but they're going to get worse
in the next few days," says Brian Feeney, a local politician.
Ironically, the parades dispute comes when the political process
in Northern Ireland has never been more successful. In the past
90 days, politicians hammered out a power-sharing agreement many
here and elsewhere believed impossible.
In May, more than 70% of the voters endorsed the agreement in
a referendum. And last month, a legislative assembly was elected
for the first time in 24 years with a similar percentage going
to pro-agreement candidates.
All that progress has left a pro-British minority with few outlets
for its antipathy toward the power-sharing arrangement. Paramilitary
violence, the favored way of making political statements in Northern
Ireland for a generation, is now largely out-of-bounds.
Cease-fires by the Irish Republican Army and its main Protestant
counterparts preceded the Good Friday deal. And the agreement
contains a powerful inducement for the guns to stay silent: Imprisoned
paramilitary members are released early so long as their comrades
continue the cease-fire.
To some extent, the parades are a means for the disaffected Protestant
minority to vent its frustration over a political process that
seems to augur nothing but retreat.
It's difficult to believe that the fate of the province now hinges
upon the unremarkable village of Portadown. There are a thousand
villages like it on the island of Ireland. A narrow, V-shaped
main road, lined with shops, restaurants and pubs, quickly gives
way to rural surroundings.
But after the last three years, Portadown's Drumcree neighborhood
has become fixed in the political geography of "The Troubles."
For the moment, there appears little likelihood of a compromise
on this year's march. The Orangemen, many of whom remain camped
in a field adjacent to the parade route, refuse to talk to the
Catholic residents' group, whose leader was convicted of taking
part in a Portadown bombing in the mid-1980s.
Competing cultures of victimization are at the heart of this logjam.
For more than a decade, ever since a 1985 Anglo-Irish agreement
gave Dublin a say in Northern Ireland's affairs, the Orangemen
have viewed developments in the province as a backward march.
They feel they already have compromised by reducing the number
of parades, their size and the type of music played. Orange hard-liners
say Catholics now are getting all the breaks.
"There's only one culture and identity being recognized here
in Northern Ireland. My culture and my identity is being denied
to me,' says Joel Patton, leader of a Orange faction called "The
Spirit of Drumcree."
To Catholics, with memories of ancient marches that included obscene
references to the pope, even today's toned-down parades are offensive.
Bridging this divide may prove impossible. But real peace in Northern
Ireland depends upon it.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Paul McErlane, AP