As peace talks resume today, Northern Ireland faces a new challenge:
vicious Catholic-on-Catholic and Protestant-on-Protestant attacks.
BELFAST, Northern Ireland -- They don't play baseball in Northern
Ireland. Yet, young men in working-class neighborhoods often carry
wooden bats. Here, they use them for beatings.
Paramilitary gangs in both Catholic and Protestant communities
have made baseball bats, sometimes studded with iron nails, a
favorite weapon for carrying out savage beatings against their
own people. The attacks are used to maintain discipline within
the paramilitary units and to punish local residents for "anti-social
behavior," everything from car theft to glue-sniffing.
For almost three decades, Northern Ireland has been split by a
divisive religious and political conflict. A Catholic minority
has been seeking independence from Great Britain, eager to be
united with Ireland. At the same time, the Protestant majority
has fought fiercely to maintain political union with the United
Kingdom.
Despite recent terrorist attacks by the Irish Republican Army,
the militant wing of Irish nationalists, bloodshed across the
religious groups is at a low point. But these punishment attacks
within each side are at an all-time high.
Groups supporting a break from Britain, including the IRA, carried
out 172 beatings last year compared with just six in 1993, according
to the province's police force, the Royal Ulster Constabulary
(RUC). Militia groups allied with the loyalists logged about 130
attacks, up from 35 in 1993. Community activists say the actual
numbers are probably much higher, since some victims are reluctant
to involve the authorities.
These are no light reprisals. Victims have been impaled on fences,
had spikes driven through limbs and been beaten while handcuffed.
In December, a 16-year-old Catholic was hung from a railing and
beaten bloody by a stick-wielding gang. He was left with a compound
fracture of the right leg.
Lack of confidence in police
The beatings provide more evidence, if any is needed, that three
decades of conflict have left Northern Ireland a dysfunctional
society.
And they illuminate a major problem preventing a return to normalcy:
working-class citizens lack confidence in the local police force.
"There is a policing vacuum in the community," says Alex Maskey,
an official of the Sinn Fein, the IRA's political wing. "People
in this community don't readily phone up the RUC if their car
is being stolen."
Former U.S. Senate majority leader George Mitchell is scheduled
to reconvene peace talks today in Belfast's Stormont Castle. No
one, especially the participants, expects much.
"We recognize punishment beatings as a very serious problem in
both communities," says the senior U.S. diplomat here, Consul
General Kathleen Stephens. "They're totally inconsistent with
political progress."
Starting a generation ago, violence in Northern Ireland meant
Catholics battling Protestants. It meant bombs in London and British
troops confronting civilians in Northern Ireland. Jan. 30, in
fact, marks the 25th anniversary of the infamous "Bloody Sunday,"
when 14 civilians died after British troops opened fire on civil
rights marchers.
These days some of the worst mayhem involves Catholic against
Catholic and Protestant against Protestant. During a recent cease-fire,
which lasted from August 1994 to February 1996, the internal splits
became more visible.
In some cases, the beatings are by appointment. A prospective
victim is called and told to report at a specific place and time.
If he (most victims are young men) does not, he is tracked down
and given a more severe beating. Realizing there is little chance
of hiding from paramilitaries in these small, clannish communities,
most who are called typically get drunk and show up.
Some attacks have been truly vicious. In a West Belfast incident,
attackers lured a man from his home and jumped him. "They done
him with hammers," recalled Ian Sloan 38, a paramedic with the
Northern Ireland Ambulance Service who responded to the call.
"His arms and legs were a mess and the side of his head. His
tib and fib were gone," he added, using shorthand for the tibia
and fibia leg bones.
Ambush, depression, suicide
James Calderwood, 60, a senior orthopedic surgeon at Belfast City
Hospital, recently treated a young man who had both arms and legs
broken by men wielding heavy iron bars. As the beating progressed,
Calderwood said, the victim heard one assailant say to his partner,
"You're not hitting him hard enough. Give it to me."
Among the most notorious cases was the beating of another 16-year-old,
Malachy Clarke, apparently in retaliation for his alleged involvement
in glue-sniffing. In October 1994, six men ambushed the boy as
he walked along a West Belfast street. They poured glue over his
head, broke his nose and ruptured an eardrum.
"The first thing he said when I asked him what happened was,
'The IRA beat me up,' " said his father, Thomas.
By Belfast standards, the attack was almost routine. But the troubled
youth fell into depression. Four days after his 17th birthday,
he hanged himself. His father has become an outspoken foe of the
IRA and Sinn Fein and their tactics.
Maskey, the Sinn Fein official, says the IRA did not assault Clarke.
He says the IRA is blamed for many attacks in which it was not
involved.
Before a cease-fire in August 1994, the paramilitary groups' favored
form of punishment was shooting offenders in or near the knee,
a technique called "kneecapping." A shooting in both knees,
ankles and elbows has been known locally as a "six-pack."
But the cease-fire took the gun out of Irish politics, not because
people disarmed but because guns went underground. So the IRA
and its loyalist rivals turned to more primitive but no less painful
methods. Bats, golf clubs, iron bars and heavy wooden sticks used
in the Irish sport of hurling all have been used to batter people
into submission.
At the root of most beatings are allegations of criminal activity.
There has been relative peace in the past 21/2 years, but crime
worries have grown. Northern Ireland's youth, both Catholic and
Protestant, often turn to crime because there are few prospects
for employment. In one West Belfast neighborhood, almost 100 cars
were stolen and torched over Christmas by teen-age "joy-riders,"
residents say.
So most people here feel little sympathy for the victims. Rough
justice is seen as better than no justice at all. "I don't believe
there are many mistakes made," says Gerry Liddy, 43, another
paramedic. "The people who get them (they) thoroughly deserve
it in most cases."
The Royal Ulster Constabulatory traditionally has been distrusted,
even despised, by many residents in heavily Catholic West Belfast.
More than 90% of its police officers are Protestants. Residents
of Loyalist areas in East Belfast also view police with suspicion.
To many working-class residents in both communities, the RUC is
too busy with terrorism to do much about routine crime.
'They want instant justice'
RUC officials insist they take all crimes seriously. But primitive
justice seems to be winning, as victims take their cases not to
the police but to local political groups with ties to the paramilitary.
"They want some sort of instant justice," says Tom Winstone.
He should know. Today, Winstone, 41, is a community worker researching
ways to end punishment beatings. He drives a modest sedan with
a colorful car seat for his 2-year-old son. But in the early 1970s,
while still a teen-ager, Winstone was sentenced to life in prison
for murder. He served 16 years in Long Kesh prison before being
released in 1989. "My community was attacked," he says quietly.
"We started to protect ourselves. Obviously, it was wrong. But
in those days, it was the only way you could see of getting anything
done."
Winstone hopes to end punishment beatings with an alternative,
community-based justice system that would include job training
and education, but any such solution is a long way off.
The legacy of the current lawlessness, meanwhile, is corrosive.
The police have kept Malachy Clarke's painful, barely literate
suicide note in which he blamed the "dirtey, stinking, roting,
piggy rats out on the streets" for his death. The RUC is investigating.
But Clarke has little hope anyone will be prosecuted for his son's
death. And this victim of street justice hints that perhaps he
may resort to the same.
"There's hardly a day goes by that I don't want to kill a few
of them. In the absence of justice and fair play, you're not left
with much, are you?"

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Max Nash, AP; PHOTO, B/W, Brian Little, AP