PIRATES FROM PAGE D-1
Pittsburgh will never be embarrassed by the way we go about our business."
At 41, younger than some major-league players, McClendon has arrived at this confluence of challenge and opportunity convinced of one thing: Hard work overcomes the longest of odds. What else would you expect from one of 13 kids from a working-class family in Gary, Ind., who made it to the major leagues and then earned a seat at an exclusive table as the first black man to lead a Pittsburgh professional sports franchise.
"He's always believed that if you work hard, your dream can come true," said his wife, Ingrid, also a native of Gary, and the person who sees the warm, gentle side of a feisty, fiery competitor, a steel fist inside a velvet glove. "He has the ability to motivate people. People are so taken with him. I think of him as like the Pied Piper."
Come to think of it, Hamelin was a problem-plagued small market too.
His father's son
He has been influenced by familiar names -- Pete Rose, Don Zimmer, Jim Leyland. But the biggest impression was made by a man who toiled in an auto parts plant, the former Budd Co., where sheet steel from Gary mills was pressed into doors, fenders and panels.
That man was his father, Grant, a former boxer in the Army, who with his wife, Hattie, raised a flock of nine boys and four girls upon a foundation of love, discipline and sweat.
"People wanted to work on his line," McClendon said over a recent lunch. "He'd tell them, 'I come to make money. I got 13 mouths to feed. Let's go.' We didn't always have everything we wanted, but we had everything we needed. If I can be half the man my father was, I will be successful."
McClendon was the 10th born and the youngest boy. "I was the punching bag. I had to be tough to make it through that," he laughed.
His hometown is like Pittsburgh without the hills, rivers and coal mines. Known as Steel City USA, it was founded in 1906 when U.S. Steel Chairman Eldridge Gary, who helped organize the world's first billion-dollar corporation, erected what was then the world's largest steel mill on the dunes and marshes of southern Lake Michigan.
To come out of that crucible to managing the Pirates is like "a fairy tale," said Benny Dorsey, McClendon's coach at Gary Roosevelt High School.
Family stability was challenged by the snares of drugs, gangs, crime and racial friction prevalent in inner cities like Gary.
"He really did endure a lot of things. Managing is no pressure compared to what he went through. He won't ever be intimidated," Dorsey said.
When McClendon played Little League ball on a company field that's not there anymore, he could hear Michael Jackson and The Jackson Five rehearsing their earliest songs. And when he'd look up, he'd see his father on his lunch hour, eating his sandwiches in the bleachers.
His father, now deceased, was with him in 1971 in Williamsport when McClendon hit five home runs in five swings and was intentionally walked in every other at-bat at the Little League World Series. Although Gary, the first all-black team in Little League history, lost the finale to Taiwan, "Legendary Lloyd" was interviewed on TV by Mickey Mantle.
"In Lloyd, his dad still lives," Dorsey said.
Right way or highway
Baseball in Pittsburgh is at a crossroads. Retro-chic PNC Park offers the promise of the future. The recent past is a reminder of what it will take to return to respectability, let alone restoring bygone glory. McClendon is the man expected to make the difference.
"It's a change in direction," said General Manager Cam Bonifay.
After a nationwide search, Bonifay and Kevin McClatchy each concluded that McClendon was the best successor to Gene Lamont. This is a time to fix the problems not the blame, and McClendon is seen as a remedy to a clubhouse that last season divided into cliques, lacked self-discipline and sank into an underachieving rut of blunders of commission and omission.
"He was seeing things that ought to be done a little differently, but not once did he overstep, undercut or undermine," Bonifay said.
McClendon's strengths were summed up in two words: communication and motivation.
"He has an inner intensity. It's not that rah-rah stuff, or screaming all the time and drawing attention to yourself. He has the ability to communicate what needs to be done at a particular time so everybody understands," Bonifay said. "The team will take on his personality. They'll be fearless and emotional."
McClendon and Lamont are friends -- it was Lamont who promoted him to the major-league staff -- and he refuses to discuss Lamont's leadership. A lieutenant walks a fine line and would fracture a clubhouse even more by speaking out of line.
The tone is his to set now. And so far, McClendon hasn't been saying the right things, he saying the perfect things.
"The only extra work we did the last few years was extra hitting. That's got to change," said McClendon. Extra drills next year will include fielding, baserunning and conditioning.
Players have already gotten the message. Nine of them were summoned to Pittsburgh last week to hear the terms of McClendon's "core covenant."
Although the particulars remain a team matter, the pact involves shared goals of collective respect, commitment, love, caring, dedication and the avoiding of anything that's detrimental to the team and the organization.
"Winning is a by-product of committing to be the best player you can be, every day, one day at a time," McClendon said. "We have to keep our nose to the grindstone, scratch, claw, bite, cheat, do what you have to do. We cannot for one instant, one day, take anything for granted."
Letters spelling out the off-season conditioning regimen have been mailed, including messages from Bonifay and McClendon of what's expected from those who will inaugurate the new ballpark.
"When we go to spring training, everybody will understand. I'll go over it from A to Z. I'm not going to take anything for granted," McClendon said. "If I don't teach them how things are going to be done, I don't have a right to get mad at them if they aren't done right. I'm no genius. Moving the runner over, executing a sacrifice, taking the extra base, turning double plays, those are things that win ballgames.
"You either buy into the program or you're out. Hit the door. This is not a country club or a sandlot team. This is a major-league team and we represent a major-league city. Anybody who comes north with us next year will not have been given a job. They will have earned it."
There's also the matter of respect for the game, which seems out of fashion in today's day and age. To McClendon, that means showing deference to the guys who paved the way, performing simple tasks like running out a ground ball and appreciating the uniform the way his first big-league manager, Rose, taught him in Cincinnati.
"Pete Rose would say when you button up your jersey to stick your chest out, square your shoulders, raise your head," said McClendon, sounding like equal parts mentor, drill instructor and stump preacher chasing sin. "Wearing a major-league uniform is a privilege, not a right."
To emphasize his point, he stood tall in Pirates black and gold.
"This uniform looks as good as any in major-league baseball. It used to intimidate people. We have to get that back," McClendon said. "When we go out on that field, people have to respect what we stand for or they're going to stomp us. I want to get back to being called Buccos. That's an attitude, a cockiness. It's in the walk and the talk. Even if we lose, I want people to be able to say, 'Our Buccos battled their backsides off.' "
The leader
By the time he was in ninth grade, McClendon was the starting catcher on his high school's varsity team. In retrospect, the freshman showed managerial traits by calling team meetings to air things out.
"He never talked loud. He led by example. I had no problems that couldn't be solved because of his peer leadership," said Coach Dorsey. "It's a rarity to see a man that young so determined to make it to the big time. There's always some luck involved, but nothing beats that good hard work."
Baseball was a way up for McClendon, an all-state player who earned a full scholarship at Indiana's Valparaiso University. Coached by the late Emory Bauer, he has since been honored as one of the school's distinguished alumni.
In college, McClendon's influence was felt on and off the field. Just ask his old roommate, John Shelton, who got kicked off the team one fall for failing to show up for a junior varsity game because he thought he should have been on the varsity.
McClendon gave him two options:sit and mope or work his way back into the coach's good graces. So before the 6:30 a.m. practices, Shelton and McClendon were up at 5:15 for extra road work. Those were the days of the "Rocky" movies, which meant the two roommates were drinking raw eggs and swallowing cod liver oil.
By spring, Shelton was reinstated and became a starter.
"I'll go through a wall for the guy. He stuck his neck out for me. I owe him," Shelton said. "His biggest asset is his tenacity. As far as baseball is concerned, he's the toughest guy I know. Nobody ever came close. He would have made a great rugby player. He's a scrapper. He doesn't like losing at anything. He will fight you over a game of checkers or backgammon."
The way Shelton sees it, McClendon has to get his players to buy into his program. And he has to win.
"But I'll tell you one thing. Don't bet against him. Don't ever count that guy out, then he's really going to surprise you," said Shelton, who is a sales representative living in Frankenmuth, Mich.
And one more thing. Skin color may still be an issue for some, but not for McClendon.
"He's never going to let race be an issue for him," Shelton said. "Whatever some people might say, it won't faze him. If it does, you'll never see it."
Poor, hungry and driven
He was told he didn't have the arm to play left field, or the quickness to play third base, or the height to play first base, or the polish to catch, but McClendon played all of those positions in his eight-year major-league career.
"I don't believe in letting somebody else define success for you or put limitations on you," McClendon said.
He was on playoff teams with the Cubs in 1989 and Pirates in 1991-92, compiling a postseason average of .625. In the 1992 National League Championship Series against the Braves, he had seven straight hits followed by a sacrifice fly and another hit.
"There's something about Lloyd. There's a reason he played on winning clubs," said Gary Varsho, a former teammate who now manages Philadelphia's Class AA club in Reading.
He thinks of McClendon as a Ph.D., which Boston Celtics Coach Rick Pitino described as poor, hungry and driven is his book Lead To Succeed.
"That symbolizes Mac. He's very driven. Whatever he sets his mind to, he's going to accomplish," Varsho said. "He's sort of a throwback. He's a student of the game. He gets players to play the game correctly, pounding that ethic that you only get better through hours of hard work."
Varsho understands the realities of what McClendon is taking on, but he believes the combination of a new ballpark and the new manager will be attractive to some free agents.
"It's going to be a little bit of an uphill climb. You need talent," Varsho said. "But I see this as a tremendous fit. Give it some time."
Community affairs
In 1991, police in Gary and the mostly white suburb of Merrillville searched for ways to defuse long-standing racial tensions. McClendon volunteered to hold a baseball clinic, bringing together kids of different ethnic groups to break down stereotypes.
The clinic has become an annual fixture, staged during baseball's All-Star break and the concept expanded to create McClendon's Athletes Against Crime, a not-for-profit foundation run out of his home in Merrillville.
To give inner city kids an alternative to gangs and drugs, the MAAC Foundation offers incentives for 50 students who show improvement in school to attend a Pirates-Cubs game at Wrigley Field each summer.
Thanksgiving turkeys and Christmas hams are distributed to needy families, with McClendon delivering the holiday baskets himself.
"It's like a cleansing of the soul for me," McClendon said.
During the earliest days of the clinic, Grant McClendon died. He was 79. A grieving McClendon could have canceled the event, but he kept his commitment to the kids.
"He wouldn't have wanted it any other way," McClendon said.
The following year, his 63-year-old mother died. Again, he found time from his family duties to see that the clinic went on.
The MAAC Foundation is funded through private donations and corporate contributions from U.S. Steel and Nipsco.
"The people of Pittsburgh are getting a quality person who has not forgotten his roots," said Lake County, Ind., Councilman Will Smith Jr., a MAAC board member. "You come through what he has and you're prepared to deal with fire and being under the gun. He has the ability to stay focused, to stay on track, in the midst of trials and tribulations. He has a dogged determination."
Or as Ed Charbonneau, manager of government affairs for U.S. Steel in Indiana, says: "The good Lord didn't make enough people like Lloyd McClendon."
Play with passion
It's been a whirlwind since the Oct. 23 managerial announcement.
Joe Torre and Don Zimmer, piloting the Yankees to their fourth title in the past five years, called during the World Series to offer congratulations. Dusty Baker also reached him by phone. And an enthusiastic ovation at a Penguins game brought a tear to McClendon's eye.
After watching the grass installation at PNC Park, McClendon wrapped up his duties as manager in the Arizona Fall League -- his Peoria Javelinas were in first place when he left -- to attend last week's general managers meeting in Florida.
He has his coaching staff in place, all with links to the Pirates -- Bill Virdon, Tommy Sandt, Trent Jewitt, Dave Clark, Spin Williams and Bruce Tanner.
"I hope people understand the Pittsburgh Pirates are as well-staffed as possible to do battle," McClendon said. "The coaches are an extension of me. They have to be people I can trust."
Spring training may be three months away, but he's already managing.
"Somebody told me once that you're going to win 70 games and lose 70 games, and the real difference is what you do in the other 22. We played as bad as we could possibly play last year and won 69 games," McClendon said.
For big chunks of the season, starting pitchers Jason Schmidt and Francisco Cordova were on the disabled list. Having them healthy will help, but there's still the issue of a staff ERA of 4.94 and a franchise record of 711 walks, shattering the old mark of 633 set the previous season.
"You're defenseless when you walk that many," McClendon said. "We have to attack the strike zone, shore up our defense up the middle."
No need to remind him that even with the new ballpark and a payroll of $ 50 million, the Pirates will spend less than half as much as the Yankees.
"I don't even want to hear that. I don't care if they have a $ 200 million payroll. We're not playing payrolls. We used to play this game for nothing. Where's the passion? Where's the desire?" McClendon said.
"I have a three-year contract, but that doesn't mean I plan on managing three years. I'd like to be here for 15 years," he added. "I know my butt is on the line. People ask me about the pressure. There's no pressure. I see this as a win-win situation. Let's get down to nut-cracking time. I'm excited."