SYDNEY, Australia -- Michael Knight, Minister for the Olympics,
uses a near-whisper monotone speaking to a handful of fellow legislative
assemblymen in the chambers of the New South Wales Parliament.
In introducing the Olympic Arrangements Bill last week, he called
for sweeping new state powers during September's Olympics, such
as $ 6,000 daily fines for illegal parking near venues and even
$ 150,000 fines for skywriting by marketers hoping to ambush official
sponsors.
Recalling the "over-commercialization" and transportation "shambles"
at the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, he softly warned the Games "will
be gigantic" and "the reputation of our nation is on the line."
Then Knight gave up the floor to a colleague who changed the subject
to his concerns over misleading ads for "virility treatments."
Staging the Olympics can seem low-key. Sydney, the capital of
New South Wales, the most populous of Australia's six states,
claims an Olympic first in having largely finished its venues
months before its Games. It has staged 32 test events and, in
another Olympic first, its main venues will be solar-powered.
And unlike the 1996 Atlanta Olympics, Sydney organizers are aligned
under a government umbrella giving Knight broad powers.
But power, obviously, with limits. Charles Perkins, an elder statesman
of Australia's Aboriginal movement who led its first "freedom
rides" in the 1960s and later ran the federal agency overseeing
Aboriginal affairs, recently created screaming headlines with
this warning for Olympic tourists: "If you want to see burning
cars and burning buildings, then come over . . . It's
'burn, baby, burn' from now on."
Aboriginal protests are only Knight's most dramatic dilemma.
* At Bondi, the Sydney suburb where body piercing and near-nude
sunbathing are as a common as beach towels, protesters vow they
will lay down in front of bulldozers when construction of the
Olympic beach volleyball facility starts next month.
* Penrith, the $ 30 million Olympic rowing, canoeing and
kayaking venue, seems bedeviled by floating ribbon weeds that
prompted two-time Olympic kayaker Clint Robinson to call "an
embarrassment."
* Australia's swimmers are embroiled in a free-for-all
over the legality of a new Speedo full-body suit meant to resemble
the skin of sharks.
* Sydney construction unions are threatening to strike
if Olympic transportation schemes cut off their access to sites.
* And there are the inevitable concerns over Olympic price
gouging. Knight himself was already buffeted by Olympic scandal
abroad and a ticketing fiasco at home. He is a politician spearheading
an Olympics in a nation that started questioning authority almost
as soon as the British Empire turned the continent into the world's
first open-air prison.
He's an obvious poster boy for Australia's famous Tall Poppy Syndrome,
which suggests having a high profile means that you are more likely
to get cut down to size.
And Knight's office high above Sydney's harbor looks straight
down on the island fort known as Pinchgut, where some of the 159,000
British convicts were punished by getting few rations -- and one
convict's corpse swung from a gallows for three years as a sort
of reminder of governmental authority.
Despite being an elected politician from a working class Sydney
suburb, Knight admits to limited communication skills. When asked
to compare himself with Billy Payne, the organizer of the Atlanta
Games. Payne, says Knight, was "immensely more charismatic, more
popular than I'd ever aspire to be. Billy was a great promoter,
great propagandist -- a front-of-the-house man."
Knight is soft-spoken in suggesting how the Games might be perceived
by the time that golfer Greg Norman crosses the Harbour Bridge
with the Olympic torch.
"When you're building a house," says Knight, "you have problems
with the builder, maybe the tiles don't arrive on time or the
colors aren't quite right. I've had several houses, and never
got the power points quite right. But then you move in and forget
it all."
But what about the smoke from those burning buildings?
"The prospects of there being violent demonstrations during the
Games are almost zero," he says softly.
Knight offers a wan smile about Perkins. "Charlie knows how the
media works," says Knight. "The more inflammatory you are, the
more likely you'll get coverage."
Weather is here
Sydney hardly lacks the raw materials to put on a show. TV weathermen's
forecasts usually consist of "fine" or "mainly fine." Based
on a century of weather data, there's only a 7% chance of noticeable
rain when the Games open Sept. 15. Sydney has 70 swimmable beaches
(with September an unlikely month for shark attacks), a handy
downtown casino, legal (and regulated) brothels and bars cleared
to serve drinks 23 hours per day during the Games.
New South Wales has about 80,000 video poker machines and banks
will stay open seven days per week during the Games. And the Australian
dollar has steadily declined in recent months to a near-historical
low.
Australia has about 40 million kangaroos, and many end up served
in Sydney restaurants. And while Funnel Web spiders, reputed to
be the world's deadliest, are common in Sydney's suburbs, the
appropriate antivenin is now widely accessible.
And activist Perkins, for now anyway, doesn't appear to speak
for other Aboriginal leaders. Adam Ridgeway, an Aborigine in Australia's
Senate, called the Perkins comments "a bizarre overreaction,"
but adds that Prime Minister John Howard's government has "guaranteed"
Aboriginal protests at the Games.
Aborigines, about 1% of Australia's population, have trailed other
Australians in many quality-of-life statistics for years and didn't
get voting rights until 1962 -- although the nation had long had
compulsory voting. But Aboriginal issues got big play in February
when a 15-year-old Aboriginal boy, incarcerated under mandatory
sentencing laws for stealing pencils, hung himself in jail.
Finally, Howard's government set off Perkins' broadside by publicly
suggesting there never was a so-called Stolen Generation. That's
the historical term for Australia's government forcibly removing
Aboriginal children from their families in the 1940s and '50s
in an experiment in forced assimilation. With many of those relocated
Aborigines now seeking financial reparations, Howard's government
suggested there was no stolen generation since not enough children
were taken to constitute a whole generation.
That may be literally true. But the assertion struck many as insensitive,
and sent Howard scrambling to broker a dealthat's meant to exempt
some minors from mandatory sentencing.
Knight, however, suggests that Aboriginal leaders, who have had
discussions with Olympic organizers for months about staging peaceful
protests, "don't have a gripe with the Olympics or the New South
Wales government. There's obviously just a great temptation to
use the Olympics to raise awareness of their cause. And that's
understandable."
Tickets, who needs tickets?
While Knight concentrates on solving the perennial Olympic priority
-- transportation -- he can't seem to escape ticketing issues
that, last fall, in the words of Prime Minister Howard, prompted
"white-hot anger" among Australians. Knight, in retrospect,
regrets following Atlanta's "complicated" system for fans to
mail in their ticket requests. And he regrets not bar-coding tickets
so that lost ones could be replaced.
Mostly though, he regrets underestimating Australians' "sense
of proprietary ownership of the Games." Any Olympics doles out
choice event tickets to key constituencies such as Olympic officials,
sponsors and broadcasters. But Sydney organizers kept that quiet
and covertly sold premium seats to the well-connected out of concern
over how they would move their 9 million tickets.
"We were so focused on that fear," says Knight, "we didn't
pay enough attention to Australians' sense of entitlement to a
ticket. And not just any ticket, but one to the Opening or swimming."
That might seem naive to Americans, who know corporate captains
have the inside track to big-event tickets. But Knight disagrees:
"It's not the public that was naive here. It was the organizers."
Live and learn.
The Olympics might have already sunk Knight's political career.
And while he won't even talk about his future, he says his low-key
stance will continue through the Games: "People should only know
about us if something goes wrong."
And if it does? Knight, who began his public service as a parole
officer, recalls advice from 1984 Los Angeles Olympic chief Peter
Ueberroth -- don't complain. "Or to put it in Australian," says
Knight, "don't whinge."

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Grant Turner, News Ltd.; PHOTO, B/W, Narelle Autio, Sydney Morning Herald; PHOTO, B/W, Torsten Blackwood, AFP; PHOTO, B/W, Andrew Perkins, Sydney Morning Herald; PHOTO, B/W; Making waves: Protesters plan to return to Bondi and lie in front of bulldozers once building of the beach volleyball venue begins next month.  Tangled mess: A workman sweeps weeds, 'an embarrassment,' from the rowing, canoeing, kayaking course.  Waiting: Minister for the Olympics Michael Knight, also a legislative assemblyman, says 'people should only know about us if something goes wrong.' Deadly: The Funnel Web spider.  Heat: Aboriginal activist Charles Perkins promised protests, saying 'it's burn, baby, burn . . . '