TITLE: THE DEMOCRATS MUST SEARCH THEIR SOUL
TOPIC: Indebtedness
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-12-09 00:00:00
SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A-15
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Union', 'Election', 'Indebtedness']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
Whither the Democrats? What now? This is the cud currently being chewed by our incestuous punditocracy.
But Democrats are asking the question, too. At least the Dems who did not have a hand in the Harris campaign.
It need not be a full-on identity crisis.
Democratic failure
To be sure, there are issues the Democratic Party failed to fully engage in 2024. Let's name some: Border security. Inflation. The opportunity crisis for the working class under 35. The housing crisis for the same folk. Extreme inequality of wealth and income.
Culture wars, particularly the rights of trans athletes and students. Poor management of our major cities, and the perception that those cities are more unsafe than they used to be.
Yet, Democrats have a positive and compelling story to tell on all but the last two issues - a political advantage even. And making an argument on any one of them might well have held the presidency or one of the houses of Congress for them this year.
Why not take inflation head on? We had a pandemic and needed to spend money and create jobs to escape another Great Depression. The pandemic was followed by price gouging and corporate greed.
Joe Biden saved us from an economic abyss and created millions of jobs. What did the corporations do except take advantage of us?
Why not take on the underemployment of younger members of the working class? Emphasize unions and a higher minimum wage, Medicare for all, and job training in the trades – education in a skill that can earn a living. We need younger men and women in the trades.
Housing is complicated. I don't think a $25,000 voucher for every millennial is a serious proposal. But we have a federal housing department and we need to build roughly one million homes to meet the country's needs - and then make sure those homes are affordable. The Democrats must make housing their issue.
The Democrats sometimes seem to have a fear of getting real. And even now they are casting about more for gimmicks and postures than arguments and policies.
But they could engage the culture wars and the problems of our cities, as well. They simply need to be honest and a little bit brave. They could say something like this: You may not like abortion. No sane person does. But an absolutist position is easy if it never touches your life. You may not have a trans kid. But one day a friend or family member will.
Rules for living together
We live in a pluralist society, not a theocratic (or Christian nationalist) one. There is not one truth or one way to live in a pluralist society. There are rules about living together.
And here are three for cities: We help cops. (We properly train them and get them into the community but then do not tie their hands.) We arrest those who commit crime.
We get the mentally ill help, not bus tokens and canned goods and shelter beds in perpetuity. Cities must also be fiscally responsible so property taxes do not sink working people.
Yes, we have real problems that the Democrats have dodged for years.
But hiring Donald Trump to deal with these matters is like hiring a car salesman to remove your cancerous tumor. Trump is not in the business of remedies.
Hiring Mr. Trump is also like going to the doctor for an allergy and waking up in a hospital without legs. He will create a new problem far worse than the one he promised to fix. If you think inflation stings now, for example, wait until the Trump tariffs kick in (if he really does impose them).
The Democrats should soul search. But here's the good news: They have a soul to search.
Trump Republicans do not. And when the crazy stuff hits the fan and the lies run low, they will have no Plan B.
So, this isn't that hard. The core ideal of the Democratic Party is to help people, especially those who need help the most, and in tough-minded, practical ways that promise a better life for all, and a better country.
Progress is not nirvana. It is proximate. But progress beats regress.
The Democratic stand
The Democratic party need not engage in class warfare or phony populist rants (the right will always out-rant) to show that it exists to be the party of equality - equal dignity and equal opportunity. And the enemy of extreme, ludicrous wealth inequality.
There is not much point in a Democratic Party that does not take this stand:
* Government can really help people. No government can really hurt people.
* Redistributing wealth upward, toward those who already have it in spades, is inherently irrational and unjust.
* The good things of our economy, and of the earth, should serve the common good.
Have a little faith in yourselves, Democrats. Stand tall. You have a soul. Bear it.
Keith C. Burris is the former editor, vice president and editorial director of Block Newspapers: burriscolumn@gmail.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Paul Sancya/Associated Press: Kamala Harris and Tim Walz cheer after a campaign rally at the end of October, just days before losing to Donald Trump and JD Vance.