TITLE: SOLAR PROGRAM LEASING HOUSEHOLD EQUIPMENT
TOPIC: Indebtedness
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-12-15 00:00:00
SECTION: LOCAL; Pg. C-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Indebtedness', 'Business Ownership']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
One day in October, Mark Gorman was scanning the daily newsletter from his local public radio station when a story caught his eye. Might an incoming Trump administration endanger a new residential solar leasing program being rolled out in southwestern Pennsylvania, the story asked?
Mr. Gorman wasn't so much alarmed that the program could be cut if Donald Trump reoccupied the Oval Office; as a retired environmental advocate who moved back to Pittsburgh from Washington, D.C., four years ago, he knows policy gears turn slowly in the nation's capital.
It was the eligibility criteria that drew him in: Pennsylvania Bright was offering to lease solar panels to low- and moderate-income households, those earning below $100,000 a year.
Mr. Gorman and his wife, the Rev. Kate Walker, had been curious about solar for years but didn't know if they could make it work financially.
Now, they believe they can. Sometime this spring, solar panels will be installed on the roof of their Bloomfield townhouse. Their lease includes a monthly payment of $122, which is expected to offset their average monthly electricity bill of $103 and add a Tesla battery for storage.
"Even if it breaks even, that's a win for the environment," Mr. Gorman said.
"The nice thing about a lease, it's like a renting a house," he said. "We'll have an app on our phone and we can track how the system is working."
If something seems amiss, the owner is responsible for fixing it.
That owner is a Rhode Island-based nonprofit called the Capital Good Fund. It gives loans to low-income households and in September launched the Pennsylvania Bright program with a target of 100 solar installations in southwestern Pennsylvania, and 60 in the southeastern part of the state, within a year.
Of those, half would be for solar panels only and the other half for solar and battery backup like at the Gormans' house.
So far, the program has secured seven leases across five counties in the Pittsburgh region, according to Alexis McCarthy, director of Pennsylvania Bright.
"Our No. 1 target is 20% savings on day one," Ms. McCarthy said.
Until recently in Pennsylvania, the cost of electricity has been relatively low and steady - the cost of the commodity, that is. Electric bills have continued to creep up in part because utilities have increased the cost of other services, such as a flat customer fee assessed each month and distribution charges.
But next year is likely to bring bigger spikes.
During a virtual seminar Friday, Sharon Pillar, executive director of the Pennsylvania Solar Center, outlined the stakes for electricity consumers in the coming years.
With large demand increases coming from datacenters, electric cars and manufacturing, and the cost of securing enough generation for the regional grid shooting up this year, Ms. Pillar warned that electricity costs are set to rise by up to 29% in 2025, citing a calculation from the Natural Resources Defense Council.
"The bottom line is, this means much higher prices for consumers - for residents, for businesses," Ms. Pillar said. "It sounds like we're exaggerating this but we're not. This is a very alarming situation."
Of the solutions, which include building utility-scale renewable and fossil fuel power plants, the quickest fixes are not on the grid but behind the meter. That is, using less electricity and building distributed generation such as rooftop solar panels and battery storage, she said.
Even before the rise in electricity prices, the big shift in solar demand over the past year has been the Inflation Reduction Act of 2022, which includes tax credits ranging between 30% and 60% of the cost of a solar project.
The Pennsylvania Bright program is capitalizing on those incentives. As a commercial owner of the panels, it can receive a payment for up to half of the cost of a project - 30% base credit and an additional 10% each for projects located in low-income disadvantaged communities and environmental justice areas. Those additional benefits aren't available to residential solar owners.
That's why the program is a lease, Ms. McCarthy said.
The panels are owned by the Capital Good Fund, which contracted with four local solar firms to do installations and maintenance on the projects.
Joe Morinville, president of EIS Solar, the lead installer for Pennsylvania Bright, has been skeptical of solar leasing programs in the past. He worried about homeowners signing up for high interest financing and the "terrible customer service" that some have experienced when they lease.
Mr. Morinville said he vetted the Pennsylvania Bright program and liked that it was run by a nonprofit and didn't charge for financing.
"It's a much better situation," he said. "It's designed to enable homes with under $100,000 in income, which is great, because it's the whole working class."
To offset the electricity used by the average Pittsburgh home would require a solar panel system that would cost between $25,000 and $35,000, Mr. Morinville said. Typically, residential customers make their money back in energy savings within four to five years, he said.
"It's a pretty good investment if you're going to be in your house a long time."
But not everyone has the upfront money - about half of residential installation is financed, Mr. Morinville estimated - and higher interest rates complicate the economics for many would-be residential customers, he said.
In fact, over the past several years, EIS's residential volume was down about 50%, he said.
The Inflation Reduction Act has changed the calculus, he said.
The Pennsylvania Bright program is also funded with grants of $500,000 from The Heinz Endowments, $500,000 from the Henry L. Hillman Foundation, and a $150,000 impact loan from The Pittsburgh Foundation, among others sources.
More program details are available at: https://capitalgoodfund.org/welcome-to-pennsylvania-bright-pittsburgh.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Lucy Schaly: This is the home of Mark Gorman and his wife, Rev. Kate Walker, in Bloomfield on Friday, Dec. 13, 2024. The couple recently signed a contract through the PA Bright program that will allow them to lease a solar array and use it to offset their electricity.
PHOTO: Lucy Schaly: Mark Gorman and his wife, Rev. Kate Walker, with their dogs in their Bloomfield home on Friday, Dec. 13, 2024. The couple recently signed a contract through the PA Bright program that will allow them to lease a solar array and use it to offset their electricity.
PHOTO: Lucy Schaly/Post-Gazette: Mark Gorman and his wife, the Rev. Kate Walker, have signed a contract through Pennsylvania Bright that will allow them to generate solar energy for their Bloomfield townhouse, offsetting some of their monthly electricity bill.