TITLE: Biden to scrap pending rules Regulations on transgender athletes, student debt dropped
TOPIC: Indebtedness
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-12-21 00:00:00
SECTION: AGD; Pg. 2
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX

BODY:
WASHINGTON "" President Joe Biden is abandoning his efforts to provide some protections for transgender student athletes and cancel student loans for more than 38 million Americans, the first steps in an administration-wide plan to jettison pending regulations to prevent President-elect Donald Trump from retooling them to achieve his own aims. The White House expects to pull back unfinished rules across several agencies if there isn't enough time to finalize them before Trump takes office. If the proposed regulations were left in their current state, the next administration would be able to rewrite them and advance its agenda more quickly. 
Even as the Biden administration moves to pull back the rules, it pushed ahead with cancellation through other avenues on Friday. The Education Department said it was clearing loans for another 55,000 borrowers who reached eligibility through a program known as Public Service Loan Forgiveness, which was created by Congress in 2007 and expanded by the Biden administration. As the pending Biden regulations are withdrawn, nothing prevents Trump from pursuing his own regulations on the same issues when he returns to the White House, but he would have to start from scratch in a process that can take months or even years. "This isn't the way I wanted it to end," said Melissa Byrne, an activist who has pushed for student debt cancellation. "Unfortunately, this is the most prudent action to take right now." She blamed Republicans for putting the Biden administration in this position. "It's a bummer that we have a GOP that is committed to keeping working-class Americans in debt," Byrne said. The withdrawals are beginning as Washington braces for a potential government shutdown that could further complicate efforts by the Biden administration to tie up loose ends. In documents withdrawing the student loan proposals, the Education Department insisted it has the authority to cancel the debt but sought to focus on other priorities in the administration's final weeks. For the regulation on transgender students, the department said it was withdrawing the proposal because of ongoing litigation over how Title IX, the landmark law preventing sex discrimination, should handle issues of gender identity.

Graphic

 
(AP Photo/Rod Lamkey, Jr.) President Joe Biden speaks during a Hanukkah reception in the East Room of the White House in Washington, Monday, Dec. 16, 2024. (AP Photo/Rod Lamkey, Jr.) (Allison Robbert/Pool Photo via AP, File) FILE "" President-elect Donald Trump speaks during a meeting with the House GOP conference, Nov. 13, 2024, in Washington. (Allison Robbert/Pool Photo via AP, File)