TITLE: Harris to Deliver Speech Urging Young People to Stay Civically Engaged
TOPIC: Education
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-12-13 00:00:00
SECTION: US; politics
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/1.DOCX
LABEL: ['Education']
LABEL: [0.999999]

BODY:
Vice President Kamala Harris, who has kept a relatively low profile since she lost the election, will speak in Maryland on Tuesday.
Vice President Kamala Harris, who has kept a low profile since she lost the presidential election, will give a speech in Maryland next week urging young people to stay civically engaged, the White House announced on Friday.
The event will take place in Prince George's County and will be Ms. Harris's fourth visit to Maryland this year, the announcement said. She is expected to address an audience of high school and college students, recent graduates and apprentices who have been active in their communities, according to a White House official who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss the plans.
The official said Ms. Harris was not expected to focus on President-elect Donald J. Trump, and the announcement said her message would center on the "ongoing fight for the future." The official said she would emphasize that young people's leadership is more necessary than ever and remind them that young people have been at the forefront of pivotal moments of progress throughout American history.
Ms. Harris's remarks are expected to echo the message she sent to young people last month in her concession speech at Howard University, when she encouraged them to not be discouraged by her defeat.
"Don't ever stop trying to make the world a better place," she said on Nov. 6. "You have power. You have power. And don't you ever listen when anyone tells you something is impossible because it has never been done before."
In the weeks since her defeat, Ms. Harris has not made many major appearances. After taking a brief vacation to Hawaii, she has dropped in to surprise Black legislators at a conference, sworn in newly elected senators, signed legislation that instructed Congress to posthumously bestow Representative Shirley Chisholm with a Congressional Gold Medal and given brief remarks at the Tribal Nations Summit.
Her speech on Tuesday comes as the Biden administration tries to highlight its accomplishments in its final weeks. President Biden this week delivered an address highlighting his economic achievements in what the White House called a "legacy speech," where he defended his proposals to reshape American manufacturing and cautioned that Mr. Trump's economic vision would hurt working-class Americans.
Throughout her tenure, Ms. Harris has led the administration's outreach to young Americans, including a nationwide college tour and meeting with young activists in the United States and overseas. On Tuesday, she is expected to share stories of some of the young leaders and entrepreneurs she has met who have worked on issues such as climate, gun violence prevention, reproductive freedom, voting rights and entrepreneurship.
PHOTO: Throughout her tenure, Vice President Kamala Harris has led the administration's outreach to young people. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Bonnie Cash for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)