Constable ignores statistics on guns
This is in response to Burt Constable's July 15 column entitled "A gun almost always turns a suicide attempt into suicide."
It's quite apparent from Burt's previous columns that he would like our Second Amendment right to own a handgun in our homes to protect ourselves revoked.
In his latest anti-handgun column, he uses quotes from Physicians for Social Responsibility, the American Journal of Public health, the Harvard School of Public Health and a Harvard epidemiologist to support his case of the part handguns play in suicide.
First, who are these people who qualify them to speak on the Second Amendment?
Perhaps one of these "experts" will be there when Burt's home is invaded and his family put at peril, and hit the offender over the head with one of their journals, thus stopping the crime.
It's a fact that states with more gun control have significantly higher rates of violent crime than those without.
A prime example is Washington, D.C., where the crime rates are higher than anyplace in the country.
Thank goodness the Supreme Court saw fit to side with a person's right to protect himself in his home in a recent decision (by the alarmingly low margin of 5-4).
States that allow conceal and carry laws and have less gun control have far lower levels of violent crime.
Suicide is a very sad part of our society and should certainly be addressed, but matched against the ability to protect myself when the police cannot respond in time, suicide with handguns is much less of an issue.
Burt, if you don't want a handgun in your house, fine, but don't tell me I can't have the right to protect myself.
If someone decides he wants to break into my house, I'll pick up the phone and dial 911, then promptly drop the phone, pick up my handgun and shoot the offender instead of waiting for police response.
I may have to fight the results in court, but at least I will be alive to do it.
Paul Robinson
Hanover Park
Positive word for GM, American cars
Reports on TV and in the press in recent days do not bode well for the future of General Motors. I offer a more positive note for General Motors and American-made cars in general.
I first learned to drive a Model T Ford at age 10 on the prairies of North Dakota.
Out of loyalty to American workers and to American-made products, in my 84 years I have never purchased a foreign brand car.
My most recent purchase in 2003 was a six-cylinder Buick Century with 42,000 miles on it. I have since added over 40,000 more miles in travels around the country.
On a recent trip to Connecticut we carefully measured the miles per gallon and were pleased that we got 33.8 miles per gallon on the highway.
In the print media and on TV I see dealers of newer foreign-made cars boasting of 29 to 31 miles per gallon.
My present Buick with its 80,000-plus miles is getting better miles per gallon on the highway.
If we are concerned about preserving a manufacturing base that must be there for the future security of America, and are concerned that working-class Americans can continue to have a sustainable standard of living, then perhaps more of us need to take these issues into consideration when we purchase our next automobile. Cheaper is not necessarily better.
Jerry Lundby
Carol Stream