DETROIT -- If you go to auto shows in Geneva or Paris or Tokyo, sometimes it's hard to see the new cars for the fashion models posed with them.
Such models formerly were a fixture at U.S. shows, too, but have been unofficially banished for years, especially from Detroit automaker displays. (European brands still did it occasionally, but they are, after all, European.)
Or so we thought. Female fashionistas were back at the preview of the Detroit auto show that opened to the public on Saturday.
Fashion models were out in force on the Chrysler stand, posing alongside the other models -- the cars -- that are supposed to be the focus of the show. Chrysler Group -- now run by Italy's Fiat -- also had fashion models at December's Los Angeles Auto Show.
Chrysler under Fiat sees fashion and cars as a natural fit.
"Beautiful cars and attractive models have long been part of the auto show fabric," Chrysler spokesman Scott Brown says. "Today, this strategy is very common among high-end European brands. ... We felt this strategy would work with our vehicles and especially, the vehicles ...  (Fiat) has brought to the company."
So no accident, it appears, that one of the model-graced displays was one of Fiat's sleek, upscale Lancia Deltas, recast and badged to be a Chrysler.
The strike-a-pose phenom is pretty much a one-way street: Men need not apply. While male dancers -- they were great -- introduced Volkswagen's New Coupe Concept, the rest of the show's models were women.
Will Nano come to U.S.?
If the pint-sized Tata Nano -- world's cheapest car -- makes it to U.S. roads, expect it to cost a lot more than its $2,500 price in India. The Nano made its U.S. debut in Detroit last week.
Ratan Tata, head of Tata and Sons, parent of Tata Motors, has said he hopes to sell the Nano in the U.S. in three or four years.
The car on display was shipped to Detroit by Michigan-based Tata Technologies, another unit of the company. The display Nano can't be driven on U.S. roads, and the car would need major changes to meet U.S. safety rules.
That could make it too costly to  build them for the U.S., says Warren Harris, president of Tata Technologies. But Tata also says that if it decides to enter the U.S. market, it's confident it could meet U.S. safety rules with a vehicle that would be well-received.
Tata Motors says the Nano is a safety upgrade in India. It was designed and priced there to replace motorbikes, the personal transportation for much of India's working class. Entire families pile onto them, with Dad driving, Mom  on the back and two or three children squeezed in around them. A cheap, sturdy car, even without air bags and three-point seat belts in the back seat, is safer, Tata says. 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Daniel Acker, Bloomberg News
PHOTO, B/W, Daniel Acker, Bloomberg News
PHOTO, B/W, Bryan Mitchell, Getty Images