Representatives of the USX Industrial Park - an economic magnet that has attracted dozens of businesses and created hundreds of jobs here - last night announced another plan to expand the park.
The expansion is a telling sign that financial good times in this working-class town of 35,000 will roll on.
Eight new lots on more than 85 acres would be created and eventually leased out to private industries under a preliminary plan presented to the Board of Supervisors.
"If we have seven new companies, each with an average of 50 new jobs, that's another 350 new jobs in the township," said Dennis McCartney, general manager of USX Realty.
The proposal marks the fourth development phase in a decade at the industrial park that now occupies much of the old U.S. Steel mill grounds, where Pennsylvania elbows into the gut of New Jersey.
Now known as USX Corp., the steel company has helped diversify the job base of what was largely a one-industry town at the mercy of a steel industry's ebbs and flows.
Thousands of jobs were lost when the company was forced to shut down its 40-year-old steel production plant in 1991, driving up the unemployment rolls more than 3 percentage points to 5.6 percent.
Since then, USX largely has become a real-estate agent, redefining its role on the former steel grounds and helping to stabilize the local economy. By parceling off and leasing out dozens of lots, the company has attracted 25 businesses and 1,200 new jobs to the site with abundant rail and river access.
Earlier in the evening, the town supervisors approved final development plans for one of those new industries - Tri-Lite Plastics - which will build a 45,000-square-foot manufacturing facility on two lots in one of the park's previous development phases. An attorney for Tri-Lite said the company would substantially expand its operation with the new facilities.
Along with local and state incentive programs for businesses, officials have credited the USX redevelopment with cutting Falls' unemployment rate to about 2.5 percent last year - the lowest in Lower Bucks.
And with about 2,100 acres left undeveloped at the site, the latest expansion promises not to be the last, McCartney said, meaning more businesses could locate in Falls.