Despite the arrival of many diminutive vehicles during the past decade, big sport utility vehicles continue to drive big profits for automakers doing business here in America. This includes SUVs from luxury players as well.  
Not long ago, the thinking was pickup trucks and SUVs were destined for the working class; those who used their vehicle on a daily basis to haul their goods and services. But these vehicles also conjure up images of ruggedness and dependability, two traits sought after by shoppers in all budget ranges. While some specialty automakers such as Range Rover have recognized the potential of targeting a rugged SUV to the non-traditional truck buyer, not many automakers followed its lead right away.  
Lexus, the up-scale division of Toyota, was another luxury automaker to recognize this opportunity when in 1996, the LX 450 debuted. It was the first SUV from Lexus and was based on the large Toyota Land Cruiser platform. It had room, it had lots of leather and had a starting price approaching the $50,000 range. Unfortunately, the vehicle was still a little rough around the edges. It offered only an in-line six-cylinder engine and third-row seating best left for pre-teens. The LX 450 filled a niche for Lexus, but it was sent into production probably quicker than even Lexus wanted it.  
The automaker wasted little time introducing a second-generation of the vehicle in March of 1998. Normally, automakers introduce major model makeovers every four to six years, so a two-year cycle is the exception, not the norm; but Lexus wanted to take the next step sooner than later. The name also changed to LX 470 thanks in part to a new, more powerful V-8 engine. The second-generation version included a new exterior body style and more upscale perks.  
Now the third-generation LX is heading to dealers this month. The 2003 LX 470 has the power and amenities Lexus buyers expect. It seats up to eight adults and now the 4.7-liter V-8 engine generates 235 horsepower, five more than 2002 editions thanks in part to a new five-speed electronically controlled automatic transmission. Full-time, four-wheel drive is again standard.  
On the outside, the 2003 LX 470 boasts a redesigned front bumper and radiator grille along with 18-inch mud and snow tires mounted on 18-inch, five spoke alloy wheels. Five new exterior colors are offered.  
Inside, the LX 470 has something important to family travel; an optional DVD player with second-row six-inch pull-down screen. Also optional is the Lexus Night View system, a near-infrared system that projects black-and-white images onto the lower portion of the windshield in front of the driver at night. The LX 470 is one of only a couple of vehicles on the road offering this night time projection system useful in detecting stray deer or pedestrians out after dark. This allows drivers to see three to four times as far as low-beam headlights project.  
Another technological highlight of the LX 470 includes standard variable gear ratio steering. This helps the large, 5,590-pound vehicle maneuver with very little steering efforts at low speeds, such as negotiating a parallel parking space. At high speeds, the vehicle remains stable with a solid steering feel. Pricing for the 2003 LX 470 starts at $63,125.  
The Lexus LX 470 was the first of three Lexus SUVs. Lexus introduced the RX 300 SUV to the world at the 1997 Chicago Auto Show before it hit the streets in the 1998. And Lexus has more in store. Later this year, the luxury automaker introduces its third SUV, the all new mid size 2003 GX 470.  
Last month, Lexus had its best sales month in its 13-year history with 24,123 units sold. Previously, its best result was registered in December of 2001.