For the 14th year, the nation was in the grip of military juntas that held on to power with secret police, attack dogs and torture. For the swelling underclasses, though, repression more often took the form of beggarly wages and a lack of worker rights.
By summer 1978, the laborers at a Volkswagen plant near Sao Paulo had had enough. They called an illegal strike that rallied 78,000 workers nationwide.
It was a watershed for Brazilian democracy - and for a quiet Franciscan who one day would be among the papabili, or leading prospects for pope.
The labor rebellion was too big, too hot, for the generals to quash by force. They instead asked Claudio Hummes - bishop of St. Andrea Diocese, home of the auto factory - to mediate.
At the talks, the generals' negotiators gestured for him to sit with them.
"I cannot sit with injustice," Hummes replied, and took his place among the strikers.
Across Latin America, it was an exhilarating, dangerous time for Roman Catholic clerics lifting the banner of "liberation theology," which held that the Gospels compelled them to take up an almost Marxian class struggle against oppression.
Hummes seemed destined to become a star of that man-the-barricades church, a figure standing defiant as junta choppers whirred at him during a stadium Mass for strikers.
But "Dom Claudio" didn't stay a radical liberationist for long.
Now 70, his hair thin and gray and his face dotted with age spots, Cardinal Hummes, archbishop of Sao Paulo, enters the conclave tomorrow variously labeled a theological conservative, a social progressive - and, in the eyes of some of his old liberationist cronies, a traitor.
In short, the cardinal thought to be one of the likeliest non-Europeans to ascend the papal throne defies categorization. And that could work in his favor inside the Sistine Chapel this week.
He is pledged to John Paul's stance against abortion, euthanasia and stem cell research. In 2000, he spoke against a suggestion by Brazilian bishops that it might be morally acceptable for those with HIV/AIDS to use condoms, to contain the disease.
Yet he also advocates for Brazil's landless and for the cancellation of Third World debt. At a conference marking the 40th anniversary of the Second Vatican Council, he asked, "Does not today's terrorism have as one of its ingredients a revolt against an imposed poverty?"
"He is bright, pastoral, moderate in outlook, terrific on social justice issues, but with enough caution and common sense that he doesn't frighten or alienate people," said John Allen, Vatican correspondent for National Catholic Reporter.
Hummes' personal prospects are rosier than those of Roman Catholicism in Brazil, and, indeed, throughout Latin America. For decades, the church has been losing members - a "very worrying" situation, he said in an interview with The Inquirer late last year at his gated villa in Sao Paulo.
"I am optimistic," he noted through a translator, "but I must also be realistic." And that reality, as he foresees it, is a "minority" church for Brazil - much like that in the United States, which is less than one-quarter Catholic.
The numbers do not argue against him.
In a 1970 census, 92 percent of Brazilians called themselves Catholic. In 1990, 84 percent did. In 2000, with the country's population at 170 million, 74 percent said they were Catholic. Of those, the Catholic Church estimated, 10 percent attend Sunday Mass.
Brazil's Catholics have been siphoned away by many of the same forces that have drained church membership elsewhere in Latin America.
One is rapid urbanization, which has turned eight of every 10 Brazilians into city dwellers.
Growing as fast as concrete sets, megalopolises such as Sao Paulo and Rio de Janiero have drawn tens of millions, mostly poor and working-class, away from the rural interior and their traditions. On that journey, a small but increasing portion has shed institutional religion. In 2000, 7.5 percent of the population claimed no affiliation, almost doubling in a decade.
But the turbulence of suddenly modern life - be it in the destitute, crime-ridden shantytowns known as favelas, or in the endless ranges of office towers - has sent tens of millions of Brazilians into the embrace of high-intensity Protestant denominations, as well as African spiritist religions.
Far from endangered, Catholicism in Brazil was an unshakable monolith of 500 years' standing when Hummes - one of 15 children, the great-grandson of German immigrants - joined clerics consumed by the "liberation" of the underclasses.
That era, recalled with awe by activist Catholics, began in the mid-1960s, after a neofascist military junta seized the government. Galvanized by the Second Vatican Council's radical new constitution for the "Church as the People of God," liberal bishops became the fiercest force of opposition to the generals.
They found a friend in Pope Paul VI, who appointed progressive prelates across Latin America in the 1970s. When John Paul II came to power in 1978, however, he swiftly condemned liberation theology as a false "rereading" of the Gospels. He loathed communism; talk of class struggle smacked of Marxism.
It has never been clear whether the young Bishop Hummes developed a similar dislike of liberation theology, or wanted to curry the new pope's favor. What is clear is that he parted ways with the movement early in John Paul's pontificate - and enjoyed the Pope's favor.
Hummes was given the largest archdiocese in the southern hemisphere, Sao Paulo, in 1998 and made a cardinal in 2001. John Paul also named him to the Congregation for Bishops and the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith - the Vatican's two most powerful offices - and invited him to give the 2002 Lenten lectures to the papal household.
The lectures are a chance for papabile cardinals to hint at what they think a pope should be. Hummes talked about less Vatican control over dioceses and a more "collegial" approach to decision-making.
That freedom from Rome's reins would allow Latin American clerics to remold the church, and possibly pull it out of its downward spiral. Catholic traditionalists may blanch, but among the ways Hummes hopes to do that in his own homeland is with high-emotion services modeled on Pentecostalism. The Catholic charismatic renewal movement already has attracted an estimated seven million adherents in Brazil alone.
In the Inquirer interview, Hummes spoke of the need to "inculturate" Catholicism with liturgies that speak to varied ethnic groups and cultures. Without that, he said, "the church's work is not complete."
Even remade, though, Brazilian Catholicism will move toward a "mission" form, Hummes predicts - smaller but stronger. Numbers, he said, will not matter as much as its followers' depth of devotion.
His vision is modeled on a mostly Protestant nation 5,000 miles north - a surprise perhaps to Catholics there who see fault lines in that foundation.
"In the United States, the church is a minority, but it is an important presence," Hummes said. "Its voice is heard."
Contact staff writer David O'Reilly at 215-854-5723 or doreilly@phillynews.com.  

Notes

THE PAPAL CONCLAVE

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
LUCA BRUNO, Associated Press
Brazil's Cardinal Claudio Hummes, archbishop of Sao Paulo, is variously labeled a theological conservative, a social progressive, a traitor to his liberationist background, and one of the likeliest non-Europeans to ascend the papal throne.