When President Clinton visits Central America this week, he will witness a region forged by one tragedy or another over the last several decades and, more often than not, forgotten in its intervals of renewal.
The president is to open a four-day visit to El Salvador, Nicaragua, Honduras and Guatemala tomorrow, the day after Salvadorans vote on a new president and further cement a remarkable democratic transformation after 12 years of civil war that left more than 70,000 people dead.
"It's almost a miracle what's happened here," said Anne Patterson, the U.S. ambassador to El Salvador.
But compared with the clamor of the 1980s, when the region's upheavals dominated U.S. foreign policy, that change has occurred nearly silently. Instead, it has taken one of the worst natural disasters to rampage through the hemisphere in modern times - Hurricane Mitch late last year - to refocus attention here.
With this visit, many Central American experts agree, Clinton has a chance to engage the region once again - with increased aid, trade preferences and protected status of Central American immi grants, for example - and to nurture young democracies that emerged only recently from armed conflicts and that remain fragile.
"The question is, do we use this moment of political stability to help strengthen the countries so they don't suck us back into the whirlpool?" said Robert Pastor, former national security adviser for Latin America under President Carter, who now teaches at Emory University in Atlanta. "We still have the responsibility to ensure that these small and vulnerable countries stand on their feet."
As opposed to the Cold War concerns that drove Washington's interest here a decade ago, Clinton's agenda for this visit will reflect the global issues of today - free trade, immigration and drug trafficking, in addition to repairing the damage from Hurricane Mitch.
But past interventions and traumas still color the region's relations with the United States. And they are especially likely to confront Clinton in places like Guatemala, where just last month a truth commission blamed Guatemalan military regimes assisted by Washington for acts of genocide against that country's Maya population during a 36-year war.
Besides helping the armies of El Salvador and Guatemala wage wars against guerrilla forces, the United States financed the counterrevolutionary war against the Sandinista rebels, who took power in Nicaragua in 1979, using Honduras as an operational base for the contras. Clinton, who first visited the region in 1997, when he met with Cen tral American leaders in Costa Rica, will travel with Hillary Rodham Clinton and tomorrow and Tuesday will tour areas devastated by the hurricane in Nicaragua and Honduras.
He is scheduled to give the major address of the visit before El Salvador's legislative Assembly on Wednesday, and then travel to Guatemala for a round-table discussion on that country's moves for peace on Wednesday evening.
On Thursday, he will meet with the presidents of the four countries, and leaders from Costa Rica, Belize and the Dominican Republic, at a summitconference in Antigua, outside Guatemala City, before heading home.
Of the previously war-torn areas Clinton will visit, El Salvador, a country of about 5.8 million, has moved the furthest toward consolidating peace. The former guerrilla movement, the Farabundo Marti National Liberation Front, is now the country's leading opposition party, boasts the second-largest bloc in the national assembly and controls a large and growing number of mayoral posts, including the capital. The governing Nationalist Republican Alliance, a party founded by extreme-right-wing leaders associated with death squads, has undergone a remarkable transformation of its own and now accepts the left's gains and negotiates with them on all levels of politics.
Last week, in the working-class neighborhood of San Jacinto, several thousand euphoric supporters of the former guerrilla party marched down a street past auto-body shops and hot-dog vendors, waving red flags and chanting revolutionary slogans, though it was clear that the change they sought would come only through the ballot box.
On a stage set up a few feet from the presidential offices here, two former guerrilla commanders, Facundo Guardado and Nidia Diaz, addressed the crowd.
"You can't be indifferent," Diaz, still going by her nom de guerre, told them, closing out the campaign on Wednesday and urging supporters to turn out for the vote, which her party is not expected to win. "It's your future, it's what's going to happen to El Salvador, what is at stake."
But peace has not come easily to this country. Since the 1992 political settlement that ended the war, U.S. aid to El Salvador has dropped dramatically, as it has in the rest of the region, to $ 34 million a year compared with $ 292 million in 1992 and more than $ 500 million at the peak of the conflict, U.S. Embassy figures here show.
The country heavily relies on remittances sent home by Salvadorans who left during and after the war and now live in the United States. That money, an average of about $ 85 million a month, or more than $ 1 billion a year, forms El Salvador's largest source of foreign exchange. Not surprisingly, the possible deportation of some of the 1.2 million Salvadorans estimated to be living in the United States is at the top of El Salvador's agenda for Clinton's visit.
Administration officials say they are seeking legal status for about 200,000 Salvadorans and Guatemalans in the United States. But a temporary suspension of deportation proceedings against undocumented Salvadorans and Guatemalans - whose numbers surged after Hurricane Mitch - expires tomorrow.
Clinton's deputy chief of staff, Maria Echaveste, said last week that the administration saw no need to extend the grace period, because "the countries can absorb the return of illegal immigrants."
Eduardo Zablah-Touche, El Salvador's minister of economy, disputed that view and said his government would push for inclusion of Salvadorans in the amnesty benefits granted to Nicaraguans in 1997.
"These are poor, small countries that have suffered internal conflicts and now have had a decade of doing things right," Zablah-Touche said in an interview. "But it's costing a lot and we need a hand."
The help Central American governments uniformly want, and con tend best serves the interests of both sides, is a free-trade agreement that would extend to Central America the benefits Mexico receives under the North American Free Trade Agreement.
The Clinton administration announced last week that it was seeking temporary enhancement of the Caribbean Basin Initiative program for textile and apparel Central American products as another way to deal with post-hurricane recovery. But the countries say that free-trade-agreement parity is crucial to compete with Mexico for foreign trade and investment and to generate jobs, and the topic is sure to dominate discussions at the regional summit meeting with Clinton in Guatemala.
"These countries have undertaken in the last five years big reforms reducing inflation, trying to put their house in order," said Enrique Iglesias, president of the Inter-American Development Bank in Washington.
The thrust of Clinton's trip, though, is to survey firsthand the damage caused by Hurricane Mitch, which killed at least 9,000 people, left thousands more missing, mostly in Honduras and Nicaragua, wiped out export crops, wrecked roads and wells and caused damage estimated at $ 7 billion to $ 10 billion.
The president has asked Congress for $ 956 million in emergency reconstruction funds for Central America and for the Caribbean countries damaged by Hurricane Georges, in addition to about $ 300 million already spent on disaster relief.

Graphic

 
MAP, MAP: By New York Times