Three years after its bloody revolution, Romania is settling into an uncertain future.
A stumbling economy has left the already poor nation coping with 130% annual inflation and unemployment nearing the 1 million mark, close to 10% of the work force.
And this winter, middle- and working-class Romanians can expect days with little or no heat, hot water or electricity, and a constant struggle to find decent food.
Underlying the physical poverty is a feeling of fear, fatalism and mistrust that lingers since the overthrow of Nicolae Ceausescu in December 1989.
But despite its massive problems, Romania is changing for the better in many ways. Those who grumble about the government and the economy do so loudly and in public, freely giving their names and opinions.
Mom-and-pop operations abound, selling everything from American cigarettes and German coffee to Polish pantyhose and French sanitary napkins.
Shops bulge with Western-made clothing not available just months ago.
Store windows along Bucharest's main thoroughfare, Balcescu Street, display microwave ovens, toasters, calculators and other electronic gadgets; a ''supermarket'' called Unic offers a wide variety of products.
''I would expect to see by the middle of the decade some profound change, and by the end of the decade some real transformation,'' says Thomas Butler, vice president and general manager of Chemical Bank's Bucharest branch.
Butler, who's lived in Bucharest almost four years, admits, ''I'm optimistic, because there are basic resources to develop an economy.'' Among them:
- Oil reserves, which allow Romania to produce 40% to 50% of its oil needs, and exploration by Western firms.
- Agriculture: Known as the ''breadbasket of Eastern Europe'' between the two world wars, Romania remains a fertile country.
- Homes are being built in the countryside now, and apartments in Bucharest are undergoing renovation, signs of ''pent-up demand (for housing),'' Butler says.
But make no mistake: Life for the average Romanian remains hard. Street crime is on the rise, and side streets remain dark and forbidding at night, populated by rats and roaming dogs.
The government, now in transition with the presidential re-election of former Communist Ion Iliescu, has slowed the pace of reform toward a market economy, but efforts nonetheless continue.
Foreign Minister Teodore Melescanu says he's encouraged by the recent visit of Rep. Tom Lantos, D-Calif., who had singlehandedly blocked Romania from receiving most favored nation trade status, which provides lower tariff rates for its goods.
What Melescanu and other Romanian officials object to ''is the kind of image (Lantos) has of Romania, the kind of image which is two years behind the reality.''
Too many Western Europeans and Americans, he believes, see Romania as ''a country in which Communists are in power and bloody ethnic clashes in the streets are normal, where miners come here (Bucharest) and beat people - which may have been true two years ago - but not now.''
A free press is one of Romania's early and clear accomplishments. Dozens of daily newspapers flourish, even if most fail to check facts as carefully as they should or maintain standards of fairness.
But if most examples of iron-fisted dictatorship are gone, 45 years of living in fear have left an indelible mark.
Suspicion of one another took a turn for the worse ''in the 1980s, I think,'' said Viviana Andreescu, a sociologist with the Center for Urban and Regional Sociology in Bucharest.
''When I was a child, people were more open, I think, without expecting something in return. But as the system became harder, suspicion spread. The whole mentality needs to be changed, but no one knows how to do it.''
Financial troubles and fears of the future aside, however, there is growing optimism in Romania. The lives of most people seem clearly better. Land is being returned to its rightful owners, a fledgling commodities exchange just opened, and recent elections were open and fair, according to foreign observers.
Salaries have risen to an average of 23,000 lei a month, about $ 53, up from a 2,000 lei average 10 years ago.
Prices have soared even more, but people manage.
''I think people are slowly beginning to understand'' what a market economy means, says Misu Nigritoiu, the man in charge of Romania's economic transition.
''They realize we have to go forward, that this is the way to go,'' Nigritoiu adds. ''I think people are more optimistic now.''
 
Contributing: Antonia Oprita in Bucharest

Notes

WORLD CLOSE-UP; ROMANIA; See sidebar; 'I cry for Ceausescu'

Graphic

 
GRAPHIC, color, USA TODAY (Map, Romania); PHOTO, color, Michel Auler, AP
 
CUTLINE: AFTER THE REVOLUTION: The statue of Lenin in Bucharest is removed in March 1990. Life in Romania is changing for the better, but 45 years of dictatorship have left an indelible mark.