Stand on the steps of the U.S. Capitol and gaze out over the familiar vista: the Mall stretching in front of you, the magnificent museums of the Smithsonian, the monolithic Washington Monument pointing to the sky, the Lincoln Memorial in the distance.
Spend your time taking in - and taking pictures of - the inspiring view. And as you're doing that, linger on this sobering thought:
You don't know what you're missing.
If you're like most visitors, the city's attractions begin for you on the west side of the Capitol and extend straight ahead to Virginia: the Air and Space Museum, the tour of the White House, the funky restaurants of Adams-Morgan, the world-class shopping of Georgetown, the handsome turn-of-the-century mansions in Dupont Circle, the embassies up Massachusetts Avenue.
There is, though, a wonderful, often overlooked, world of history, sights, and monuments - not to mention perhaps the finest breakfast spot in Washington - to be found simply by pointing yourself in the other direction.
Go East, young man - and woman - and discover that there's a lot more on Capitol Hill than the Capitol. And it's more than enough to fill a weekend visit to the nation's capital.
Want to learn about the teenage girl whose daring Revolutionary ride makes Paul Revere's jaunt seem like a leisurely canter? Feel like wandering through a marketplace that's been serving the city since 1803? Have a yen to visit places of juicy scandal, or see some of the most important sites in black history?
And avoid the crowds, too?
It's all outside the Capitol's back door.
Although calling it the "back door" doesn't quite seem fair. Or accurate. The fact is, the most imposing view of the building is from the east side, and that was by design - the design of Pierre L'Enfant. The Frenchman who planned the city expected the well-to-do to build their homes out toward the Anacostia River at the eastern edge of the city, and he wanted to give them something to look at.
Instead, starting nearly as soon as Capitol construction began in 1793 on what was then called Jenkins Hill, the area turned working class, filling with pubs, boardinghouses and markets. When he was an Illinois congressman, Abraham Lincoln and his family lived in one of the long-gone homes on First Street.
During the Civil War, Capitol Hill took on the feel of a gigantic medical ward, with much of the available space turned into hospital rooms. By the late 19th century it had changed again, this time into a middle-class haven, which it remains today.
It's a pleasure to move along the tree-lined streets, filled with townhouses built a century ago. The homes are well-maintained, architecturally intriguing - and colorful. One house in the 900 block of East Capitol Street is particular cause for a double take: It's bright orange.
To get a quick sense of the area, you can take the perfectly straight East Capitol Street exactly one mile from the Capitol to Lincoln Park, one of the many green oases planned by L'Enfant. This park, though, stands out from the others because of the two monuments within its borders. One is a large memorial to Mary McLeod Bethune, an early 20th-century educator, civil rights leader and the first black woman to head a federal office; in 1936, during President Franklin Roosevelt's first term, she was appointed Director of Negro Affairs in the National Youth Administration.
The other, older statue has a fascinating history. The Emancipation Memorial depicts a slave kneeling at the feet of Abraham Lincoln, who holds the Emancipation Proclamation. According to The Guide to Black Washington, the kneeling figure was modeled on Archer Alexander, the last man captured under the Fugitive Slave Law, who is shown breaking the chains of slavery. Fund-raising for the memorial, which was financed almost completely by freed men and women, began shortly after Lincoln's assassination; a plaque points out that the first donation of $5 was given by Charlotte Scott, a former slave in Virginia. The statue was the city's primary tribute to Lincoln until the Lincoln Memorial was built in 1922.
In between the Capitol and Lincoln Park, the east-west streets are lettered and the north-south streets are numbered. Although it sounds simple, you have to keep in mind that the four quadrants of the district - northwest and southwest, northeast and southeast - meet at the Capitol. That means that one block north of East Capitol Street is A Street N.E., while one block south is A Street S.E.
It doesn't help that North Carolina, South Carolina, Pennsylvania, Maryland and Massachusetts Avenues all move through Capitol Hill at different angles. But it really doesn't take long to get your bearings, and while walking is obviously the best way to get up close and personal, you can scout around in your car; free street parking isn't difficult, even on weekends.
The question is where to begin. One good spot is across the street from the Capitol, with two of the most important buildings in the country: the Library of Congress and the Supreme Court.
The Library of Congress was established in 1800 when Washington replaced Philadelphia as the capital. The early collection, though, was burned by the British in 1814, and the beginnings of the present collection - 6,487 volumes - were purchased from Thomas Jefferson.
When the library ran out of space in the 1890s, work was begun on what is now known as the Jefferson Building. Recently refurbished, it looks more like a French palace than a library. Today there are more than 100 million items in the library: films, scripts, sheet music, the largest map collection in the world, and, of course, millions of books. It is open for research, but even if you don't have to look up anything, the Great Hall is worth a visit. The ceiling is 75 feet high, covered with gold leaf. Statuary, paintings and frescoes cover the floors and walls, and the railings along the two great staircases are decorated with whimsical, white-marble carvings of babies.
Visitors to the Supreme Court building, constructed in 1935, can move through a quick line to get a sample of how the court works, or wait in another queue that leads to a gallery seat. The session begins the first Monday in October and generally runs through June.
SHAKESPEARE LIBRARY
The next building on East Capitol Street is the Folger Shakespeare Library. You can't miss it: It's large, white and the walls are decorated with scenes from Shakespeare's plays. Inside, in addition to the world's finest collection of works by and about Shakespeare, are a gallery for exhibits and a theater.
That's about it for the big, showy places. The area quickly becomes a residential and commercial mix. One home near the Supreme Court is especially worth seeing.
The Sewall-Belmont House (144 Constitution Ave. N.E.) is the headquarters of the National Woman's Party. Parts of the house have been dated to 1680, although the history of the current structure began in 1800 when it was built for Robert Sewall, a wealthy Washington resident. Treasury Secretary Albert Gallatin lived there when he drafted the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 for President Thomas Jefferson.
The Belmont in the home's name is from Alva Belmont, a wealthy suffragist who was the major benefactor of the National Woman's Party. Alice Paul, who founded the party and drafted the Equal Rights Amendment in 1923 (it's yet to be ratified), lived there.
Today the mansion collection honors female activists. There's a desk used by Susan B. Anthony, marble busts and portraits of women suffrage leaders, and a small bronze sculpture showing Sybil Ludington riding sidesaddle. Sybil's role in the Revolutionary War has been all but forgotten, a fact the guides at the mansion are trying to correct. Ludington was 16 when, on April 26, 1777, she made a 40-mile round-trip through the region around what is now Danbury, Conn., to alert her father's militiamen to an impending British attack. Longfellow, though, never wrote a poem about her. (The mansion is open 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Tuesday through Friday; noon to 4 p.m. Saturday and Sunday.)
CAPITOL FRIEZE
Most of the other key sites are in the Southeast quadrant. A couple of blocks from the Folger library is an old stucco house at 326 A St. S.E. Built in 1850, it was the home of Constantino Brumidi, a 19th-century artist who painted the fresco in the center of the Capitol dome in 1865, applying the paint directly to the wet plaster. Brumidi began the frieze around the rotunda, but died after starting Penn's treaty with the Indians. It wasn't until 1953 that the frieze was completed.
Two historic churches bear noting. Ebenezer United Methodist Church (Fourth and D Streets S.E.) began life 160 years ago as Little Ebenezer Church, and as such in 1864 became the home for the first free school for black children in Washington. Today's building dates to 1897. A model of the original Little Ebenezer stands on the Fourth Street side.
Christ Episcopal Church (620 G St. S.E.) is believed to be the oldest church within the original city limits of the district. The congregation was founded in 1795 and the present church dedicated on Oct. 8, 1809 by Bishop Thomas J. Claggett, who was the first bishop consecrated on American soil. Presidents James Madison, Jefferson and John Quincy Adams are reputed to have worshiped here.
A few doors away (636 G St.) is the birthplace of John Philip Sousa, the march king. The home, though, is not open to the public.
Farther east on G Street, at the corner of Eighth Street, is the site of the original Marine Corps Barracks, the oldest Marine post in the country. Jefferson picked this spot in 1801. The Commandant's House was built four years later and is the only original building on the base, which occupies a city block. On Fridays in the summer Marines take part in the Evening Parade, a colorful pageant featuring banners, a march in dress blue and the Drum and Bugle Corps. Reservations are necessary.
One of the odder tourist stops is at 517 Sixth St. S.E. That's where Gary Hart lived in 1987 when he was caught apparently getting cozy with Donna Rice. He was considered the frontrunner for the Democratic presidential nomination until then.
Another senator who called the neighborhood his home was Joseph McCarthy, leader of the red-baiting Communist scare in the early 1950s. He lived from 1953 until his death in 1957 at 20 Third St. N.E.
One last homestead remains only in the memory of longtime Capitol Hill residents. Seward Square, a small park between Fourth and Fifth Streets, is the location of the nondescript Capitol Hill United Methodist Church. Before the church was built, the home of J. Edgar Hoover stood on the site. Hoover was born in the house in 1895 and lived there until 1938.
Seward Square is one of the neighborhood's pleasant parklets and in a great spot, just a block from the city's oldest marketplace, Eastern Market, which occupies a triangle bordered by C and Seventh Streets and North Carolina Avenue. A combination outdoor/indoor flea and food market, the place is busy on weekends with produce-sellers from Virginia, Maryland, West Virgina and Pennsylvania, local craftsmen selling jewelry, florists, booksellers, artists, woodworkers and rug merchants. Those on the outside crowd their booths next to one another. Inside, in a long building that dates to 1873, it's reminiscent of Reading Terminal Market.
Occupying a small space inside is the Market Lunch, a well-worn breakfast-and-lunch spot with such a lofty reputation that it is not uncommon to see a line of 30 to 40 people stretching out the door, waiting an hour or so as four or five cooks - squeezed into a spot no wider than a theater aisle - frantically try to fill orders for pancakes, omelettes and crabcake sandwiches.
The wall in front of the seating area is covered with newspaper clippings that sing the praises of the food, and a sign warns customers not to read newspapers while they eat, an order designed to keep the turnover brisk.
It's a gem of a spot. And it's perfectly situated, right in the middle of a gem of a neighborhood.
IF YOU GO Getting there. By car: From Philadelphia, take Interstate 95 south to Interstate 495 - the Capital Beltway - and take the beltway east to Exit 22 (Baltimore/Washington Parkway). The parkway leads to Route 50, which turns into New York Avenue in Washington. New York intersects with North Capitol Street. Turn left and head straight for the dome. By train: Take Amtrak to Union Station, which is within walking distance of the Capitol.
Staying there. Washington is awash in hotel rooms and many of them go begging on weekends. Plenty of hotels offer special weekend packages; ask about them. Quite a few of the chains - Best Western, Holiday Inn, Quality Inn - are within walking distance of the Capitol.
Information Contact the Washington, D.C., Convention and Visitors Association, 1212 New York Ave., N.W., Suite 600, Washington, D.C. 20005. Phone 202-789-7000.

Notes

WEEKEND JOURNEY

Graphic

 
PHOTO AND MAP;
PHOTO (3)
1. The east side of the Capitol, which some might think of as its "back door," actually is the most imposing.
2. Necks crane for a view of the lofty ceiling covered with gold leaf in the Jefferson Building of the Library of Congress. The building holds 100 million items.
3. Eastern Market, operating since 1803, spreads its wares outdoors and in a building that houses the popular Market Lunch. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, RALPH VIGODA)
MAP (1)
1. Capitol Hill (The Philadelphia Inquirer)