It was a long distance to travel, but senior high students from Lake Nokomis Lutheran Church in Minneapolis were eager to teach Vacation Bible School to children in the Sunset Park area of Brooklyn in New York City last month.
     "It was a little shaky for me, a new experience, but I was looking forward to it," said Dane Swanson, 17, of St. Paul. "I haven't spent a lot of time with kids, but it was fun. It was interesting to see how you could bond with them, watch them learn about Jesus and give them the opportunity to attend a church program in this specific part of Brooklyn."
   Swanson was one of 14 students who spent a week teaching the "Lava Lava Island" Vacation Bible School program at St. Jacobi Evangelical Lutheran Church. The multicultural congregation serves primarily the Chinese- and English-speaking communities of Sunset Park, one of the highest points in Brooklyn, with a view of the Manhattan skyline.
     Marion Palm, St. Jacobi church secretary and coordinator of the music healing ministry begun after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, said the Minnesota youths interacted very well with their new friends.
     "They were really sweet and very dedicated," said Palm, who was raised in Brooklyn and graduated from the University of Minnesota. She said she was especially impressed that the Minnesotans adapted the program to fit the needs of families in Brooklyn.
     "Children of people in these working-class neighborhoods all go to after-school programs because their parents work," Palm said. "They cannot go to Vacation Bible School in the afternoon or do a whole day [due to lack of transportation]. These kids adapted to that [by arranging for parents and the church to provide transportation]."
     When the Minnesota contingent arrived at St. Jacobi, no children had registered for the Vacation Bible School.
     After canvassing the neighborhood to generate interest and hand out fliers, students and chaperones met with parents to arrange transportation for the children.
     "One of the things we really worked on before going was sharing our faith and not being ashamed of what you believe," said Dale Toso, youth director at Lake Nokomis Lutheran.
     Stacy Howell, 15, of Minneapolis, said talking about her faith and Vacation Bible School with strangers was challenging and a little intimidating at first.
     "Sometimes people would turn you down," Stacy said. "You had to find the strength to talk to somebody else. In the end, it turned out pretty well. If I was asked to do that again, I would go in a heartbeat."
     Toso said the experience helped the students develop leadership skills. Last year, students from Bethlehem Lutheran Church in Minneapolis led a similar program at St. Jacobi.
     About 30 Hispanic youths - no children from the church registered - ranging in age from 4 to 14, attended the Vacation Bible School. In Lava Lava Island, groups of five or fewer become members of a crew with an adult or teenage leader who helps them explore Bible principles through stations that include drama, singing, storytelling, games and crafts and "tropical treats." Lava Lava was Ddeveloped by Group Publishing Inc., in Loveland, Colo.
     At the end of each day, students and chaperones toured Manhattan.
     Stacy Howell said she was dazzled by the view of Manhattan from the Staten Island ferry. She attended her first Broadway show, "Beauty and the Beast."
     The day before the Midwesterners headed home, members of St. Jacobi treated them to a picnic at Manhattan Beach near Coney Island. While there, they helped rescue a seagull caught in the string of a kite.
     Palm enlisted the aid of a nearby police officer, who freed the bird, which was briefly stunned. The church youths then encircled it so it couldn't get away before regaining its strength.
     "One solitary bird was flying overhead through the whole thing," Palm recalled. "It struck me," she said. "That's the way our Lord watches over us."
     Karen Gail Jostad is at kjostad@startribune.com.  

Graphic

 
MAP; PHOTO