Reverend Rich rolls his Mister Softee truck slow and popular down a steamy Philly street.
Barefoot kids wave dollar bills to stop him, the breeze from flapping currency nearly strong enough to cool the concrete.
Rich leans out the window, welcome as Santa, to serve chilled comfort to a small mob. For Philly kids, mobile ice cream is both a rite and a right of summer - a generations-old tradition, a hot-weather entitlement.
People call Rich Hasenberg reverend because he's a born-again Christian who will slip in a word or two about God on his endless rounds through Frankford, Northwood and Oxford Circle in the Northeast.
He views his customers as part of his ministry. He keeps a Bible inside the truck, and has been known to park and counsel abused women or squabbling couples he has spotted out on the street.
"Remember, Jesus loves you," he tells a little boy as he serves up a perfectly peaked $1 cone, stately as Everest and almost as cold.
"Yeah, I know," the kid shoots back, more interested in getting cool than in getting saved.
Not everyone goes for Sunday sermons with their sundae service - "Sell ice cream, not religion," an offended customer once told him. But most people tolerate it because Rich is a nice guy.
Born in Rio, raised in Jersey, Rich, 44, knocked around as an insurance agent and a driving-school instructor before climbing on board with Mister Softee 16 years ago. He drives 10-hour days, six days a week, for the guy who owns the truck. Sundays, of course, he takes off.
As a child in South Jersey, he became friendly with a Mister Softee driver - also a born-again Christian - who gave kids free candy and an occasional cone on the house.
Not long ago, Rich himself decided Jesus was the answer to his disaffected, "money-grubbing" life. He hopes to have a conventional church ministry of his own someday. But for now, he's happy to dispense Christian doctrine along with the chocolate jimmies, a missionary on wheels in a town of ice cream-lapping sinners.
"The lack of caring is what's destroying the world," says Rich, a stocky man with a dark mustache and a balding head. "I actually care about the people I serve."
He has counseled countless folks on his route, his customers say. Kay, an elderly woman who was recently widowed and had lost the will to live, says she has benefited from Rich's help.
"I lost my husband and Reverend Rich helped me, he really did," Kay says as she buys a cone.
The born-again ice cream man claims that his godly manner has helped keep him safe on the street, no small thing in a profession that invites trouble. Two summers ago, Philadelphia Mister Softee driver Mohammad Jaberipour was shot dead during a robbery attempt by Neil Lyew, now 19 and serving a life sentence for the crime.
Aware of the potential perils, Rich says he has used his Bible as his sword.
"Once, a youth had a weapon and tried to rob me," Rich remembers. "I said to him, 'Do you know why you're robbing me? 'Cause Jesus loves you and sent you to me. Other drivers carry guns. I just have this,' and I showed him my Bible.
"He was scared, and he started to run off. I got out of the truck and went after him, and started giving him the story and testimony of my life. He left before I finished."
But, Rich says, a drug addict overheard the religious talk. He asked Rich for money, which Rich gave him.
"I never expected to see my money or the man again," Rich says. "But one year later, he's on the corner, clean-cut, with a job, and he returns my money and says, 'Thank you, brother. You saved me that night last year when you talked to that robber.' "
On a particularly hot day last week, Rich is making his rounds to a mostly ungodly group. No one wants to hear about Jesus; a boy from St. Timothy's Catholic Church even makes an obscene gesture toward the truck.
But Rich is as nimble in the profane world as he is in the sacred, and ignores the slight and keeps serving soft ice cream.
"Let's give my customers a break," he says, as he lowers the Mister Softee theme song that plays in endless, grating loops over a truck loudspeaker.
The moving ice-cream parlor snakes through the tight warren of Northeast streets, working-class neighborhoods crowded with little kids who practically inhale cones, then wear the ice cream on their white T-shirts like sticky badges of honor. As Rich rolls down one block, a little red-haired girl dances around a No Parking sign, gleeful in her anticipation of Rich's impending visit.
"This job may make me a better father," says Rich, whose wife Bonnie Jean is expecting. "It teaches you patience and the importance of listening to kids."
"Yo, yo, Softee, yo," they clamor. No longer able to ruminate on his future, Rich gets back to work.
"They say it's time to leave this job when you can hear the Mister Softee jingle in your dreams," Rich says.
It hasn't happened yet. But, Rich says, he hopes to have a stationary pulpit in some nice New Jersey church before that day ever comes.

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO (2)
1. In Frankford, Nigel Wright, Chris Kieffer and Lindsay Marino, all 11, brought their business to Reverend Rich last week. (The Philadelphia Inquirer, AKIRA SUWA)
2. His Bible in easy reach, the ice cream man of 16 years cruises Frankford. He says he has counseled many on his rounds.