AMERICANS tend to think of teachers as saints or servants, with low pay in either case. The saintly teacher, who persists in the memories of aging adults, inspires the young and solves problems that confound parents and politicians. Teachers as servants are pushed around by their superiors and insulted by the public. Their advice about education is generally ignored.
 It therefore came as something of a surprise when, at a recent meeting that brought business people and educators together in Washington, an elementary school teacher stole the show by simply reporting what teachers say about their lives in school.
Fred M Hechinger, in About Education column, discusses recent remarks by Brookline, Mass, elementary school teacher Katherine Boles, that effectiveness of many teachers is undermined by the way they are treated by administrations and parents; Boles holds teachers are most supported in small, affluent school districts and least supported in schools in less-affluent districts; drawing
Katherine (Kitty) Boles, who teaches third grade in a Brookline, Mass., public school, is a member of the Boston Women's Teachers' Group, an organization of research- minded teachers who try to diagnose why the system often makes it difficult for teachers to function at their best. The group conducts workshops and trains discussion leaders with a view to exporting the workshops to other communities.
Miss Boles is no malcontent. She has been a teacher since 1971 and has high praise for her present school and supportive principal. But she knows that she is by no means typical. Two studies by Sara Freedman, the group's project director, ''The Effects of the Institutional Structure of Schools on Teachers'' and ''Teaching: An Imperilled Profession,'' persuade her that the effectiveness of many teachers is undermined by the way the world, even the academic world, views and treats them. She is aware of inequalities that involve more than school financing.
''What is most upsetting about those we interviewed,'' Miss Boles said, ''is the consistent pattern: the most empowered teachers, the teachers who felt the most self-confident, excited, competent, the teachers who felt the most supported by administration and parents, were teachers in relatively small, affluent school districts.
''The least empowered teachers,'' she continued, ''the ones who received the least support, did not respect their administrators, felt demoralized, or were just plain angry, were those who worked with the least empowered part of the population, the poor and working class.''
Teachers' voices throw light on the problems of American education. A teacher in a working-class community said: ''That's the thing that really kind of aggravates me about education: We as educators are not treated as adults. I feel the administrators still look upon us as being children.''
On the same theme, another teacher in a similar community commented: ''What I'm required to teach is predetermined. The equipment I use is predetermined. All the books are predetermined.''
By contrast, a teacher in an affluent suburb talked with excitement about summer lectures and discussions with experts from major universities, and how the experience improved her teaching.
There are recurring complaints about principals: ''Every Tuesday is a half day for faculty meetings. The boss does all the talking.'' Another teacher complained that the principal addressed teachers as if they were first-graders.
Anger builds as teachers find how little control they have over their workplace.
The researchers said the ''burn- out'' label applied to many teachers today is a misnomer. Instead, they see anger and frustration as teachers, despite their limited powers, are held ''responsible alone to correct complex societal and institutional dilemmas.'' When schools provide neither an outlet for such anger nor a means of correcting unsatisfactory situations, anger turns inward or is directed at fellow teachers and adminstrators and, it might be added (although the study does not say this), at the children.
Persistent squawks over the intercom, common in most schools, make matters worse. In many systems, teachers can push a ''privacy'' button to keep the front office from listening in to what goes on in the classroom. ''It has been rumored, and I believe the rumor, that the principal can override that and listen,'' one teacher said. Paranoia or fact? It almost does not matter in its effect on teachers.
There is the sense of loneliness, as one teacher put it: ''Teaching is certainly an isolated kind of thing. It's true that we deal with the children, but there is fairly limited contact professionally with our peers.''
Occasional euphoria gives way to self-doubt as teachers are bombarded with negative public judgments. ''I walked into a supermarket the other day and the boy who was checking out my groceries said 'Hello, Mrs. -' with such love,'' a teacher told the interviewer. ''He's 18 years old, and they remember me. A lot of kids that I meet years later have wonderful memories.'' Then, all of a sudden, the teacher added, people say, ''You're no good.'' Who is right? In the end, the teacher, who used to love her job, asks herself: ''Maybe I'm really not that good. Maybe I should never have gone into teaching.''
How does it add up? Miss Boles concluded, ''We cannot expect our teachers to feel accountable for a curriculum they had no responsibility in creating, when they have not had enough training in new curricula to teach them well, when the decisions about how their school is to function are taken completely out of their hands.'' Even though principals often appear as villains in the teachers' accounts, Miss Boles rejected this as an oversimplification. Principals, she said, are also victims of decisions made or philosophies held by those above them. A principal in an affluent town may transmit to teachers the support he himself enjoys. An autocratic principal in an inner-city school may simply let the bad treatment he has suffered trickle down to his staff.
The researchers found too few teachers who felt supported and their work valued. Yet, despite their feeling of powerlessness, most of the teachers continued to do their jobs and to care about the children they taught.
Information about the Boston Women's Teachers' Group may be obtained through P.O. Box 169, West Somerville, Mass., 02144.

Graphic

 
drawing