Representative Brian J. Donnelly's district starts in the working-class neighborhoods of Boston and stretches south to suburbs like Randolph, tree-shaded sanctuaries for the children of the city's ethnic immigrants. When this new generation moved out here, many of them found their taxes rising, their outlooks changing and their votes shifting.
Take Patricia Griffin, a real estate manager, who backed a Republican Presidential candidate for the first time last fall.  Earlier this week she attended a Chamber of Commerce breakfast with Representative Donnelly, and her message to the lawmaker was clear: Support President Reagan's economic plan.
Steven Roberts discusses issues raised by constituents of Representative Brian Donnely in Boston, notes voters' criticism of planned budget cuts
''People were fed up with the poor management of the Democrats,'' said Miss Griffin, who considered herself a liberal a decade ago.  ''Reagan said he would do something, get something passed and nothing had been done for so long. Whatever he's able to accomplish, we'll feel some satisfaction with that.''
The nation's legislators have been home in their districts for the Easter recess the last two weeks and, according to interviews in a half-dozen cities, many of them have heard from constituents like Miss Griffin. However, Mr. Donnelly has heard many opinions that conflict with Miss Griffin's, and many other lawmakers found voters in growing numbers criticizing some of Mr. Reagan's specific budget cuts as unreasonable and unfeeling.
 
The Contrasting Viewpoints
''Nobody knows the difference between Reagan's budget and the Democrats' budget,'' said Mr. Donnelly, a second-termer who is on the House Budget Committee. ''People are just committed to doing something different, because they feel past policies haven't worked.''
But Representative Geraldine A. Ferraro, Democrat of Queens, who reported two months ago that her district heavily backed the President, said: ''My mail has totally turned around. I don't think my people have changed their minds. I just think they didn't realize what was happening. In many instances we're getting, 'Yes, we have to balance the budget, we have to cut the deficit, but please don't touch this program.' ''
Next week the House of Representatives will take up the budget for the 1982 fiscal year. The House Budget Committee, dominated by Democrats, has reported out a plan that would allocate more money for social programs and less for defense than President Reagan's budget.  By advocating a lower tax cut, the Democratic budget also projects a lower deficit than the President.
 
El Salvador and Haig
The budget was not the only subject on voters' minds this week, and several legislators discerned a rising uneasiness over American support for the Government of El Salvador. ''People here recognize,'' said Representative Dante B. Fascell, Democrat of Florida, ''that a country so close by as El Salvador cannot be allowed to be taken over by Communists, but even the very conservative Miamians don't want El Salvador to be turned into another Vietnam.''
Representative John L. Burton, Democrat of California, reported strong objections to Mr. Reagan's plan to lease oil drilling rights off the Pacific Coast and growing doubts about Secretary of State Alexander M. Haig Jr. ''A lot of serious people out here think he is a little bonkers,'' Mr. Burton said.
But the focus was clearly on the economy, and much of the sentiment around the country boiled down to the remark of Paul Connolly, a businessman here, who said of Representative Donnelly: ''I think he should go all the way with the President's program. What we've been doing for the last 20 years hasn't worked.''
 
Appeal to 'Worst Instincts'
To many Democrats, this antitax, antigovernment mood has been fostered by conservative politicians like President Reagan. ''In this state,'' asserted Representative W.G. Hefner, Democrat of North Carolina, ''peoples' worst instincts have been appealed to. They think all the causes of all our problems are government giveaway programs.''
While the President seems highly popular in most districts, lawmakers have been besieged by constituents who are increasingly alarmed at the potential impact of Mr. Reagan's proposed budget cuts.
''The tide has turned,'' declared Representative Dennis E. Eckart, Democrat of Ohio. Representative Gerry E. Studds, Democrat of Massachusetts, added: ''This meat ax approach is not what people voted for. I really think people are saying, 'Hey, wait a minute.' ''
In the Florida district of Representative William Lehman, a Democrat from North Miami Beach, some voters expressed a concern that cuts in job programs would lead to riots in Miami. In Queens, Representative Ferraro heard about reduced Social Security benefits.  In San Francisco, Representative Burton met with city officials who say that reduced funds from Washington will mean higher local taxes.
In a long day of meetings, Representative Donnelly of Massachusetts listened to endless expressions of pain and concern. Ilene Seidman, a public interest lawyer, told him that proposed welfare cuts would have a ''disastrous effect'' on many families where members are working or attending college.
Mr. Donnelly supports the Democratic budget, a compromise bill that accepts many cuts in social programs but restores money for some key services. But to his immense irritation, many voters seem totally polarized: The conservatives want all of the Reagan budget cuts, while the liberals want none of them.
Late in the afternoon, Mr. Donnelly finally blew up at a group of city workers representing the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees. When they argued for increased spending for domestic social programs, the lawmaker accused them of living in a ''never never land'' of liberal dogma.
When Mr. Donnelly advised the union members to back a ''strategic withdrawal'' from the liberal bastions, a worker named Frank Mercier shouted back, ''Your strategic withdrawal means a lot of heartache and tragedy out there. It means lost jobs and families torn apart.''
By the end of the day Mr. Donnelly was torn by the conflicting demands of Miss Griffin and Mr. Mercier, and angry at his inability to sell the Democrats' attempt at compromise. ''Are you sensing that we Democrats have no great sense of direction?'' he told one group wearily. ''You're right.''