Like many Chinese, Hao Xijuan sees the government's economic transformation as a way to a much better life.
 Last fall, Hao, 23, heard from a friend that Honeywell had openings at its plant in the Tianjin Economic-Technological Development Area. She gave up her temporary job as a bank teller to get a permanent job as an assembler at Honeywell's 100-employee plant, which opened in 1994 to manufacture industrial production controls and heating controls for apartment and commercial buildings.
 "I hope to stay a long time," said Hao, who rides 3.6 miles to work on her motor scooter and lives with her parents, both retired shipyard workers.
Her father, one of millions of entrepreneurial Chinese who have started small businesses, has opened a tiny general store. Together with a brother and his wife, they share a two-bedroom, fourth-floor walkup that they own, complete with an automatic washer and two TVs. They are a fairly typical working-class family newly able to strive for the beginnings of a Chinese middle class.
 Of the Minnesota manufacturers operating on Chinese soil, Honeywell is the biggest in terms of number of employees. The company has operated in China since the 1930s, when it opened its first distributorship in Shanghai for sales of products imported from abroad, principally from the United States. But only recently, in the 1990s, has it begun manufacturing. It already employs 2,500 production workers and is growing.
 Honeywell's second major on-the-ground manufacturing investment was the acquisition in 1996 of the Duracraft consumer products plant in the boom town of Shenzhen. Plant sales were about $ 113 million last year, up $ 10 million from 1996.  Continued growth is expected.
 The work force of about 2,300 is young, averaging 20.25 years.  Most are from China's poorest regions. Almost all are single; 60 percent are women.
 All parts are imported. Finished products are shipped to some 100 buyers in the United States.  Top-of-the-line models that go to Sears, for example, carry its Kenmore label. Most of the others are labeled Duracraft.
 It is an assembly-line operation, and most of the individual workers spend entire shifts repeating the same simple task, such as putting two screws into a part passing by on a conveyor built.
 At mealtimes, the production workers are required to walk single-file from their workplace to punch in and out with their ID cards at electronic time clocks in the free company dining room. They live eight to a room in company dormitories at no charge. Honeywell officials said living conditions are acceptable, given that the dorm rooms originally were to house a dozen workers each.  Officials declined, however, to allow journalists to visit the dorms, contending it would be an invasion of privacy.
 Honeywell seems to have a mixed view of the potential impact on its operations of the government's newest efforts to modernize its ponderous state-owned enterprises.
 Roger Custer, manufacturing vice president, said Tianjin government officials are "requesting" that Honeywell give hiring priority to workers laid off from the state-owned giants. He has reservations about that, describing occasional experiences when former state workers hired at the Tianjin plant performed erratically. As a whole, he said, they are less productive than others, having worked in a "culture of doing only what they are told to do when they are told to do it."
 He said he does not look forward to the day when local officials may begin to apply real pressure.  "We have to play it straight.  If you give in, it won't end."
 Another Honeywell executive sees the state-owned situation as more of a possible opportunity. Scott Clements, the corporation's new director of investor relations in Minneapolis, was until recently the finance director for the China region, based in Hong Kong. He continues as a member of the board of directors overseeing Honeywell's joint venture with Sinopec, the huge state-owned Chinese oil refiner and petrochemical producer.
 In 1995, Honeywell signed a five-year agreement to provide advanced process-control technology for Sinopec's 38 enterprises. The goal is to improve quality, increase production, lower pollution and cut costs. Total Honeywell revenues were projected at $ 150 million, one of the biggest deals ever for its Industrial Automation and Control section.
 What may be a cloud drifted over the venture in November. The central government ordered Sinopec, a successful operation, to acquire two unprofitable petrochemical enterprises with 50,000 employees and $ 360 million in debt.
 It is the biggest example yet of one of the government's strategies to streamline its largely unprofitable state-owned sector - requiring those who are successful to merge with those who are not in hopes the amalgam will survive without huge layoffs.
 Will this be a financial drag on Sinopec that hampers the Honeywell project?
 Clements said he doubts it.  In fact, he said, Sinopec's expanded responsibilities might "broaden the access" for Honeywell to do even more business with the giant than anticipated.
 Honeywell, anticipating growth of 25 percent annually, projects China sales of almost $ 500 million by 2000.

Graphic

 
Photograph; Photograph; Photograph; Cartoon; Cartoon