Fengping Geng knows that what her Chinese customers want and what her American customers want are rarely the same thing.
At her Northern Chinese-style restaurant, Amazing Dumplings, her Chinese customers prefer dumplings stuffed with the traditional way, with pork and cabbage. Her American customers prefer dumplings filled with kung pao chicken - something you're unlikely to find in actual China.
Ms. Geng's Squirrel Hill restaurant serves classics familiar to anyone from Northern China, a region home to more than 600 million people. But when it comes to their English translations, names of those dishes get clunky. Try to translate biangbiang mian, and you'll just end up with "biangbiang noodles," which are named for the noise that a strip of dough makes when it's thwacked against a counter (biang! biang!).
On English-language apps like UberEats or Grubhub, this makes listing dish names tricky.
For a while, Ms. Geng has been faced with a conundrum: If she changes the dish name, customers who don't speak Chinese might understand it better. But then, how would Chinese customers recognize it as the dish they love from back home?
Now, there's a solution: an app that allows her to speak to her Chinese customers directly.
Actually, make that three apps.
As the number of immigrants from Mainland China has grown - and crucially, grown richer - Chinese food-delivery apps have sprung up to serve America's Chinese delivery market. The apps offer a Mandarin-language experience for people on all sides of the equation, from restaurateurs to couriers to consumers.
Now, three of the apps - Fantuan, HungryPanda and Ricepo - are vying for dominance in cities across the U.S.
Pittsburgh, with its large international student population and vibrant Chinese food scene, has proven to be particularly fertile ground.
As ubiquitous advertising in areas like Squirrel Hill shows, the Steel City is in the midst of an all-out app marketing war.
The founders
Biangbiang noodles are from northwestern China's Shaanxi province. So is Dax Li.
When Mr. Li moved to Rochester, N.Y., for college in 2010, he missed the flavors of his hometown: thick wheat noodles, juicy lamb, dry spice. He got close with a local restaurant that did malaxiangguo - a kind of build-your-own spicy mixed pot - but for the most part, restaurants near him served dishes from China's south and Hong Kong. And the majority of restaurant owners spoke the language of that region, Cantonese, rather than Mr. Li's native Mandarin.
It all meant ordering at Chinese restaurants wasn't as easy as Mr. Li and his fellow students from Mainland China might have expected.
Although the U.S. has attracted large numbers of Chinese immigrants since the 19th century, the 21st century has seen a demographic shift. As China's economy boomed, immigrants from there became wealthier. The number of Chinese students at U.S. universities grew dramatically. The population of Chinese immigrants grew six-fold between 1980 and 2016, according to the Migration Policy Institute. Over time, emigrés were more likely to be from the heart of the country's economic boom, the Chinese Mainland.
Meanwhile, Mr. Li , living in upstate New York, was hungry. "We ordered a lot of delivery in the winter," he said.
He and his friend started approaching local Asian restaurants, offering to create Mandarin-language menus in simplified Chinese characters and distribute them among students.
Back then, Mr. Li's project was analog - occasionally a fax machine got involved.
Today, he and his co-founder from the University of Rochester are CEOs of Ricepo. In 2021, the company was acquired by Weee!, a grocer specializing in ethnic food delivery, for an undisclosed amount. It's likely a good network for Ricepo to be part of. The Fremont, Calif.-based Weee! has raised over $800 million in funding to date.
Ricepo is in the Pittsburgh market already, but the app plans to redouble its efforts later this year when the city is slated to be Q4's "main push." In the leadup, the company has partnered with local restaurants to offer exclusive menus - authentic dishes that you won't find on an English-language app (on a recent visit to Yue Bai Wei, for example, flyers advertised Ricepo-exclusive dishes).
The restaurant owners
To Ms. Geng, the advantages of a Chinese app are clear. Which of the apps to choose from is trickier.
Representatives from each Chinese-language app have stopped by Amazing Dumplings to woo Ms. Geng, whose customers are fiercely loyal, thanks to her serving some of the only authentic Northern Chinese food in the city.
She opted for HungryPanda after returning from a trip to New York, where she saw its blue-and-white bear logo everywhere.
"With HungryPanda," her favorite of the three, "I can better sell traditional Chinese food, and attract more people to come and get to know Chinese dishes," she said, also praising the service as "very reliable."
These apps allow owners to do more than just use Chinese. They allow restaurant owners to show Chinese-speaking customers different menus entirely.
You can see the difference in the apps' algorithmically generated "popular dishes." On Doordash, the most popular chicken dish at Amazing Dumplings is kung pao chicken. On Ricepo, it's Xinjiang-style dapanji, or "big plate chicken," a dish few non-Chinese-speaking Americans have heard of.
Ms. Geng said the constant visits from local app reps haven't always been pleasant.
She said she was dissuaded from signing on with Fantuan when a representative said the company would take 25% of each order.
"How could we survive?" she asked. (HungryPanda and Ricepo take 10% of her orders instead). Fantuan did not respond to the Post-Gazette's request for comment.
The eaters
Like Ricepo, HungryPanda was started by a Chinese student studying abroad - this time in the U.K. Its expansion strategy is similar in that the company focuses on areas with high numbers of Chinese students, just on an international scale.
When the London-based HungryPanda expands into a new city, it hires local campus representatives to make the app known among college students. It also has sales reps who approach restaurants. (HungryPanda actually entered the State College market before Pittsburgh's, due to the size of the Chinese population at Penn State.)
Xiaohan Feng, U.S. general manager for HungryPanda, said it benefits from the fact that food delivery was already popular in China.
But food delivery isn't just "popular" in China. It's ubiquitous.
In Chinese cities, the delivery ecosystem is more advanced than in the U.S. Delivery fees are dirt-cheap. A huge labor force means couriers can sometimes arrive at your doorstep within 15 minutes of an order being placed. Meituan, one of the most popular apps, employs 4 million couriers alone.
The food itself is often cheap, too, although that doesn't mean China is a food utopia: A stark divide between the haves and the have-nots means some of the most delicious food on Earth is prepared and delivered by working-class Chinese, often from rural areas, who work hard for less money. (The same biangbiang noodles that Ms. Geng sells for over $15 would be under $5 in Beijing.)
That means international students, who are more likely to come from the class in China that orders food than the one that delivers it, often have pretty advanced ordering habits.
At white-collar jobs in China's major cities, it's not uncommon to order food delivery for lunch every day. And that's precisely what makes capturing the Chinese ordering market such big business - even in U.S. towns where the Chinese population is relatively small.
Pittsburgh is the city where "college town" and "major metropolitan area" meet. Mr. Feng personally visited earlier this year to ensure the new local HungryPanda team was working well here.
"Pittsburgh was one of the most important launches in H1," he said, referring to the first half of this year. "We tried to figure out, OK, what's the root connection between all the universities and the colleges there? And who are the people that can help us to promote ourselves to our potential audience?"
HungryPanda settled on a mixed strategy of campus ambassadors, promotion on Chinese social media apps, and paper flyers - although it's the physical ads you're most likely to see. Walk through Squirrel Hill, for instance, and you'll notice stickers on windows, posters on restaurant walls, pamphlets at checkouts.
If you've been to Yue Bai Wei, a Sichuanese restaurant on Forbes Avenue lately, you were likely greeted by a large poster propped up by a stand at the doorway. When seated, you were handed a pamphlet along with your menu. And when you made a bathroom break, another poster exhorted you as you washed your hands to scan the QR code to learn more.
Surrounded by all the advertising, it'd be easy to think that Chinese delivery apps are at peak saturation.
Mr. Li and Mr. Feng both say they're far from it. Both hope to expand their services to non-Chinese restaurants, and that's already beginning. In Squirrel Hill, Turkish Kebab House sports a window sticker advertising Fantuan. Not to mention, a fourth Chinese-delivery app, Chowbus, has yet to even enter the Pittsburgh market.
"We're not at a phase where we are talking about competition," said Mr. Feng, who believes Chinese delivery apps are simply growing at the same rate U.S. cities' Chinese food scenes are.
And now, Chinese students who have stayed away from Pittsburgh campuses due to remote classes and COVID-19 lockdowns are beginning to trickle back.
To Mr. Feng, that's more good news because they'll be hungry.
Noelle Mateer: nmateer@post-gazette.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Emily Matthews/Post-Gazette: Stickers advertising delivery apps, including Ricepo and Fantuan, can be seen on the window of 98K Hamburger in Squirrel Hill.
PHOTO: Emily Matthews/Post-Gazette: Stickers advertising delivery apps, including Ricepo, Hungry Panda, and Fantuan, can be seen on the window of Yue Bai Wei in Squirrel Hill.
PHOTO: Emily Matthews/Post-Gazette: Stickers advertising delivery apps, including Ricepo, Hungry Panda, and Fantuan, can be seen on the window of Yue Bai Wei in Squirrel Hill.