Rupert Murdoch has made a career of painting his critics as elitist, privileged and out of touch. But the English lawyer who stands at the center of the legal battles that have engulfed his News Corporation did not attend a select law school or work at a top London law firm.
In fact, until 2009, when a parliamentary committee heard evidence into accusations of widespread phone hacking at News Corporation's News of the World tabloid, Mark Lewis, a 47-year-old solicitor from Manchester, had never been inside the House of Commons.
Mr. Lewis is one of a small handful of lawyers who have led the civil litigation against News Corporation over suspected phone hacking at its now-closed News of the World. He has represented nearly 100 clients, including the family of Milly Dowler, the kidnapped 13-year-old whose voice mail is said to have been hacked by the tabloid.
The phone-hacking scandal has not jumped the ocean to the United States, but Mr. Lewis will. On Monday, he will hold meetings in New York to look into filing at least three civil suits related to phone hacking at The News of the World.
Mr. Lewis said his clients believed their voice-mail messages were intercepted while they were visiting the United States or as they left messages on British cellphones that had been hacked by The News of the World.
''If the person leaving a message is American, why should they travel across the Atlantic to issue a claim?'' Mr. Lewis said.
Mr. Lewis would not discuss the details of the suits but said they related to two professional sports figures and at least one United States citizen. A spokesman for News Corporation declined to comment on Mr. Lewis's visit to New York and any potential suits in the United States.
The path that led Mr. Lewis to one of the most prominent legal battles against a major corporation sounds ''like a John Grisham novel,'' Mr. Lewis said.
The son of a part-time secretary and a failed businessman, Mr. Lewis grew up in Radcliffe, a working-class town on the outskirts of Manchester. He studied law at the University of Chester and for years loyally read The News of the World. He has multiple sclerosis, which has left him with a debilitated arm and a limp that has not slowed him down.
In 2006, Mr. Lewis specialized in defamation cases (''It almost sounds like ambulance chasing,'' he said) at George Davies Solicitors L.L.P. One of his clients, Gordon Taylor, a former soccer player and the chief executive of the Professional Footballers' Association, sought to stop The News of the World from publishing an article that claimed he was having an affair.
Mr. Lewis stopped the article's publication. He then wrote to The News of the World, requesting the tabloid pay his legal fees ''on the basis that if you don't ask, you don't get it,'' he said.
In response, he received a letter from News International, the News Corporation subsidiary that published The News of the World.
''They said no to my request, but they put in this throwaway line in the letter that said, 'This was a proper journalistic inquiry,' '' he recalled. ''That caught my eye.''
A few months later he had his living room television on and noticed that the private investigator Glenn Mulcaire and the royal family reporter Clive Goodman had pleaded guilty to phone hacking. Photos appeared of celebrities who had been named in court as having had their voice mails hacked. Mr. Taylor's picture appeared.
''That was my light-bulb moment,'' Mr. Lewis said. ''If I'd had a different channel on or looked at the TV two minutes later, none of this would've happened.''
He wrote to The News of the World and accused the tabloid of hacking into Mr. Taylor's cellphone. In his research, he sued London's Metropolitan Police Service in order to gain access to documents pertaining to his client's case. In this trove, he uncovered a document now known as the ''for Neville'' e-mail, frequently mentioned in subsequent parliamentary hearings.
The e-mail, to the longtime News of the World reporter Neville Thurlbeck, contained transcripts of cellphone conversations, proof that the hacking was more widespread than the work of a single rogue reporter, as the company initially claimed.
In response to his claim on behalf of Mr. Taylor, a News International in-house lawyer, Tom Crone, visited Mr. Lewis in Manchester. ''I'd been doing that job for 17 years, and he'd never left his office to come see me,'' Mr. Lewis said.
News International paid more than $:700,000, or $1.1 million, in 2008 to settle the case with Mr. Taylor, several hundred times more than typical damages in British invasion-of-privacy cases.
Mr. Lewis soon began to hear from others who claimed their phones had been hacked by The News of the World.
Mr. Lewis said he believed that News International had put him and his family under surveillance and assembled a dossier with details about his personal life. Mr. Crone later told British lawmakers that News International had collected information on two lawyers who had worked on suits related to phone hacking. He did not specifically name Mr. Lewis. (News Corporation declined to comment.)
In 2009, when The Guardian newspaper of Britain published an article about phone hacking at The News of the World, Mr. Lewis lost his job at the firm. ''They made a business decision that pursuing this was too much trouble,'' Mr. Lewis said.
He and his wife of 19 years, with whom he has four daughters, divorced. He lost his house and sold a couple of his coveted vintage cars on eBay to help pay the bills. Then, Milly Dowler's mother reached out to him to pursue the family's case against News International.
''I was running out of money, living on credit cards, and pretty close to giving up, and just on that afternoon I got a call from Sally Dowler,'' Mr. Lewis said.
In October 2011, the Dowler family received a $4.8 million compensation package, including a $1.6 million charitable donation from Mr. Murdoch, News Corporation's chairman and chief executive, who personally apologized.
''That was the turning point,'' Mr. Lewis said.
The phone-hacking scandal has cost News Corporation $379 million, which includes legal and consulting fees and costs related to closing The News of the World, according to the company. Several media analysts say the cost could total nearly $1 billion as News International settles suits.
No suits have been brought against News Corporation in the United States. Mr. Lewis said he planned to meet with Norman Siegel, a prominent civil liberties lawyer in New York, to discuss how to proceed with filing suits. Hacking phones on United States soil could potentially violate privacy and telecommunications laws.
A person knowledgeable about News Corporation who could not discuss private conversations publicly said the company had not seen any evidence that supported Mr. Lewis's claims.
A year and a half ago Mr. Lewis relocated to London to take a job at Taylor Hampton Solicitors. In a twist that Mr. Lewis calls coincidental, a founder of the firm, Daniel Taylor, previously worked as an in-house counsel at News International.
''If you wrote it in a novel, people wouldn't believe it,'' he said.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Mark Lewis