The Fox Network came fully equipped yesterday to its coming-out football press conference. First there was the new logo, quite green, for the color of Fox's $1.58 billion investment in football, and yellow.
Next came a fast-cutting video interspersing gridiron imagery with Homer Simpson, the Bundys and the cross-dressing "Men on Football" from "In Living Color," and eardrum-quaking audio of the Beatles' "Revolution" that broke glass in Ella Fitzgerald's china closet.
Finally came two of the faces of Fox: Pat Summerall and Terry Bradshaw.
John Madden, Fox's third carving upon Mount Murdoch, had left town Wednesday.
So now we know Fox Sports exists in flesh and bone. Until now, it seemed like an ephemeral extraterrestrial force that had broken into Rupert Murdoch's Cayman Islands bank accounts and booted CBS out of pro football.
Of course, now that the first round of its expansion draft is out of the way, it has vowed to disappear again.
"We're going underground for 60 days," said George Krieger, the executive vice president of Fox Sports. By then, word will leak out that they have hired Matt Millen, Lesley Visser, Pat O'Brien and Jim Gray from CBS; ESPN's Dan Patrick, Rock Rote, Lloyd Lindsay Young, the child sportscaster Sparky Mortimer and WJM-TV's Ted Baxter.
The Foxies' temporary presence above ground answered several questions:
Q. How did Bradshaw decide to leave CBS (which had nothing to keep him there) to follow football to Fox?
A. In very serious tones, Bradshaw said: "Finally, I called my dad. He said, 'Son, you're a football man.' " The full, unabridged advice from Papa Bradshaw was quite Kiplingesque: "Yours is the turf and everything that's in it, and -- which is more -- you'll be a football man, my son!"
Q. How much will Bradshaw be paid?
A. Bradshaw paused before answering: "Thirty-four million over 42 years. I'll get my last check after I'm dead."
Q. How miserable has it been for Summerall at CBS?
A. "I had dinner with David Hill last night," he said, referring to the president of Fox Sports, "and I did something we haven't done at CBS for a while: I laughed out loud." No, CBS hasn't lately been a mirthful ride in the Madden Cruiser for the former place-kicker. "Not a lot of happy times at CBS," Summerall said. "Once we knew there'd be a challenge by Fox and we may not do football anymore, nobody told a lot of jokes."
Q. Having committed $395 million a year for National Football Conference rights, will Fox try to cut costs by making Summerall take the bus with Madden?
A. No. Summerall said he "likes to fly." And remember this: Madden may be making $7.5 million a year from Fox, but he's still a humble guy. He owns one pair of sneakers at a time, replacing it only when they grow too malodorous. Maybe a Nike deal is out of the question for Madden.
Q. If Fox reunited Summerall with Madden, will they sign Greg Gumbel to rejoin Bradshaw on Fox's one-hour pre-game show?
A. Well, we don't know much. But Bradshaw kept talking about his chemistry with Gumbel. How he loved him like his brother. "Our chemistry was so great that it was like we were best friends and we couldn't wait to go to work," Bradshaw said. Ed Goren, CBS's former senior producer who fled for Fox Sports as the new executive producer, described the growth of the Gumbel-Bradshaw chemistry. But Hill wouldn't comment, saying: "I have this old-fashioned belief not to negotiate in the press." Gumbel won't be calling on Fox until after his duties as host at the Winter Olympics end on Feb. 27.
Q. How does one measure Fox's avowed 12-month commitment to football?
A. For that, we turn to Goren, who said: "When John Madden calls in March to talk football, we'll talk football!"
Q. What are we talking about here, "The Twelve Months of Football"? Gosh, each Super Bowl pre-game show feels like a year in itself.
A. "Why should the most popular sport have six months' exposure that switches off after the Super Bowl?" Krieger asked.
Indeed. The Foxies talk about year-round marketing and promotion, and hint about some kind of programming. We suggest a few off-season series: "Madden's Head," a sitcom that Telestrates every idea and future endorsement in Big John's brain, and "Refs!" the live crime-fighting episodes of Smilin' Jerry Seeman and his ornery N.F.L. officials.
Q. How long before Fox goes after other sports and becomes more than Fox Sport?
A. "Way in the future," said Krieger. Fox never bid for the TV rights to the 1998 Winter Olympics, and doesn't seem ready to fall over itself for college football or basketball. Forget golf for its older demographics. "It's not in our interest to have our interest diverted," he said.
Q. How can we gauge the excitement level of an ex-CBS executive like Goren, who beat out bigger names in the business like Mike Weisman and Terry O'Neil?
A. As he left the press conference, he shouted out: "Yay! We're going to work!"
Q. Since the best available football talent comes from CBS, will Fox hire Mr. and Mrs. Big Fan, the working-class stars of CBS's football promotions?
A. The question nearly made Hill gag with laughter. His snickering said that Shannen Doherty and Barney the Purple Dinosaur were more likely replacements.