MY PAPER CHASE
  True Stories of Vanished Times
  By Harold Evans
  Illustrated. 580 pp. Little, Brown & Company. $27.99
  Newsmen are by nature good storytellers, and no stories animate them quite so much as their own. Yes, they will say, that late-breaking piece turned the tide, and certainly that campaign against feckless bureaucrats landed nicely. But ask them how they got the goods in the first place, and be prepared to pull up a chair. 
  Sir Harold Evans knows his way around a story, having served as the editor of The Sunday Times of London, The Times of London, and all manner of publications up and down the food chain. As the title of his new book, ''My Paper Chase: True Stories of Vanished Times,'' suggests, he describes an epoch past, an era in British journalism when type was poured hot, articles deemed unfit landed on an actual spike, and the men -- and it was mostly men -- who commanded all of it were literate buccaneers.
  If all that sounds a bit silly, a gaslight waltz of serious men in eyeshades that has nothing to do with how journalism evolved, then ''My Paper Chase'' will leave you hopelessly, relentlessly bored. But do not confuse the modern newsroom (a generally quiet place that could be part of an insurance company) with the newsrooms of old -- palpable theaters of language and ideas. The book is a fight song that revels in the music of those times past. 
  All of 16 years old, Evans went to apply for a job at The Ashton-Under-Lyne Reporter in the north of England and got his first look inside the guts of the machine that clacked out the lines of type that eventually became a newspaper. In a paroxysm of recall, he writes: ''The floor was filled with long lines of iron monsters, each 7 feet high, 5 feet wide, decked out with an incomprehensible array of moving parts. . . . A man crouched in communion at the foot of each contraption. . . . It was hot news. Lead, antimony and tin bubbled in each Linotype's melting pot, kept at 300 degrees centigrade by a gasoline burner.''
  The ''vanished times'' of the subtitle speak to an era when journalists made things, part of a complicated daily manufacturing apparatus of typesetting and printing that always ended in the satisfying plop of a physical object.
  No one was more satisfied than Evans, who saw in newspapers a route out of those humble, stout beginnings that crop up again and again in narratives that hew to the Great Man theory of history. (It makes sense that Evans would go on to write ''The American Century'' and ''They Made America,'' works that suggest history was made by those with their hands on the levers of wondrous machines.)
  It sounds as if it all started when he walked into his first newsroom, but unfortunately for the reader, it does not. Like so many biographers of the self, Evans mistakes his textured childhood (he was born in 1928 in Manchester to Welsh parents) for something of authorial moment. Although class resentments and strivings -- a persistent theme here -- were formed in the crucible of his early days as the son of a railroad worker and a shopkeeper, the simple dignities of family and work are so thoroughly recollected that the reader might be tempted to set aside the book. 
  That would be a mistake. Like printing presses, the narrative cranks up slowly but then begins whirring as it celebrates bygone glories and dwells on the truths of good journalism that still obtain. 
  Evans is given to fair and sometimes hilarious self-estimation. Joining the Royal Air Force one year after the end of World War II, he ''had no aptitude for anything,'' except for a newspaper he started with his mates. In spite of his prosaic high school education, he parlayed his military service into entrance to Durham University, where he became an honors student and earned his master's, all the while nursing his newspaper ambitions. He graduated to a job at The Manchester Evening News, where he learned the folkways and the rigors of journalism in midcentury England, excelling after he was given a column. A Harkness fellowship brought him to the United States in 1956 -- he mistakes himself for a savant on American race relations -- and began a romance with this country that would blossom years later. In 1961, he became editor of The Northern Echo, a daily in northeast England.
  Using an archaic, regional newspaper as his platform -- he is the necessary transformative figure at calcified institutions throughout the book -- Evans began a crusading style of journalism that came to define his career. He and his paper afflicted the guilty, championed the innocent and, in a series that gained him a reputation beyond the provinces he was operating in, helped push through a national program for the detection of cervical cancer. 
  A thinking person would never confuse journalism with heroism; save for the few among us who run toward danger, the two isms rarely meet. But in ''My Paper Chase,'' Evans pulls back the blankets on various forms of mis- and malfeasance and goes to significant lengths to make it all sound very exciting. Along the way, he had many standoffs with publishers, printers, bureaucrats and politicians, although he admits, ''One of the characteristics in which I'm deficient as an authority figure is that I don't scare people.'' 
  Instead, he wheedles, cajoles, bluffs and, yes, occasionally shouts. His commoner's touch for public causes, combined with an uncommon eye for talent, eventually brought him attention from the so-called quality papers of Fleet Street. As a rube from the north of England, he regarded that interest with a mix of desire and insecurity. When he was offered a job at The Sunday Times by the editor, Denis Hamilton, the top four positions below Hamilton ''were all held by Oxbridge men.'' Whatever Evans lacked in terms of clubby connections, he seems to have ameliorated with ambition and good timing: ''I was a beneficiary of the late-breaking waves of political, cultural and social changes that gathered force in the mid-1960s.'' When the top job at The Sunday Times came open in 1967, he grabbed it with both hands, editing the paper for 14 years -- during which he used the newspaper's investigative team to reveal that hundreds of British children who had been born with severe birth defects because of thalidomide had been shunted aside without compensation.
  Evans was, by all accounts, a relentless opponent of Britain's strictures on journalists, tempting the fates by publishing exposes about the spy Kim Philby and the diaries of the former Labour minister Richard Crossman. It was a heady run, and even if he occasionally uses a purple crayon rather than his black editor's pencil, he renders those times with real drama. (Given his background, his tone-deafness to the underpinnings of the Troubles in Northern Ireland comes as a surprise, and a corrosive report on Bloody Sunday constitutes one instance where he failed to publish when he probably should have.)
  It is a paradox of his working-class origins and his love of the smell of lead that Evans came to see the plump and often corrupt printers' unions as the most implacable foe of progress. Indeed, it explains why he was willing to take the job as editor of The Times of London when the union antagonist Rupert Murdoch bought the paper in 1981. But despite Murdoch's promises not to meddle -- the author does not miss the chance to point to the pledge Murdoch made to the Bancroft family to obtain the prizedWall Street Journal -- Evans was undermined at every turn and left after a year. (He chronicled that fight in ''Good Times, Bad Times.'')
  In 1978, Evans ended a long marriage with three children that is barely referred to in the book. He had fallen in love with Tina Brown, 25 years his junior, enraptured by ''her innocent integrity and wit.'' They moved to America, where Brown used something besides innocence to conquer vast swaths of magazining while Evans became an executive at the Atlantic Monthly Press, U.S. News & World Report, Conde Nast Traveler and Random House. 
  Brown eventually took her franchise to the Web in the form of The Daily Beast, but in ''My Paper Chase,'' Evans's romance with language is an artifact preserved in amber. ''A newspaper is an argument on the way to a deadline,'' he writes. And when that deadline is met, something worth brandishing comes forth. ''How delicious the smell of the still warm newsprint!'' he says of the love of his life. ''How envious the rivals would be!''

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO (PHOTOGRAPH FROM ''MY PAPER CHASE'')