25 Years of A&M
This is a climactic moment in the career of Herb Alpert, the 50-year-old pop-jazz trumpeter and co-founder of A&M Records whose Tijuana Brass albums bubbled to the top of the pop charts in the late 1960's. At the same time that A&M is preparing to celebrate its 25th anniversary in Los Angeles with two weeks of festivities, Mr. Alpert is enjoying his first major hit since 1979 with his current Top 10 single, ''Diamonds.''
The song, which features a guest vocal appearance by Janet Jackson, is one of four tracks on Mr. Alpert's new album, ''Keep Your Eye on Me'' to have been written and produced by the red-hot Minneapolis-based team of Jimmy Jam and Terry Lewis.
''Last year, when I presented them with a platinum album for Janet Jackson's 'Control,' I jokingly suggested that they produce an instrumental record, and they took me up on the idea,'' Mr. Alpert said the other day. ''I flew to Minneapolis, and we ended up cutting tracks that were half instrumental and half vocal. Jimmy and Terry had originally written 'Diamonds' for the Human League, but it didn't have a finished lyric or melody. In the middle of the session, I picked up a cup and used it as a mute, and that became the trumpet sound on the record.''
Mr. Alpert, who is the A in A&M Records (the M is for his partner and former promotion man, Jerry Moss), reminisced about the days when A&M - which along with Motown is one of the country's two largest privately-owned record companies -was a fledgling operation run out of his West Hollywood garage.
''Our first single, 'The Lonely Bull,' was a big success in 1962,'' Mr. Alpert recalled. ''The idea behind the song, which was composed by a writer named Sol Lake, was to capture the feeling Jerry and I both had while watching the same bullfight in Tijuana. Jerry thought up the name Tijuana Brass. It was just a name without a concept. In fact, it didn't occur to me to make more records that sounded like that until people who heard 'The Lonely Bull' assumed that the Tijuana Brass was a quasi-mariachi band.''
Founded on the hits of the Tijuana Brass, Sergio Mendes and Brasil '66, and Chris Montez, whose records Mr. Alpert produced, A&M grew steadily to become a major label by the end of the 60's. The most successful artists on A&M and its affiliates have included the Carpenters, Joe Cocker, Cat Stevens, Carole King, Peter Frampton, Supertramp, Quincy Jones, Styx, Joe Jackson, Bryan Adams, the Police and Janet Jackson. One of the quality labels A&M now distributes is Windham Hill, the successful West Coast ''new age'' company that has developed a fruitful association with the Canadian folk-pop label Open Air. Another is Nimbus, an English classical label.
''Because we're independently owned, we've been able to retain an intimacy within the company,'' Mr. Alpert said. ''Everyone from top to bottom knows what's going on. And we didn't buy our artist roster. The careers of our most of our artists have been developed through the years.''
 
Warren Zevon Returns
Warren Zevon, the West Coast singer and composer whose roustabout rock songs like ''Werewolves of London'' and ''Poor, Poor Pitiful Me'' have earned him the nickname ''the Peckinpah of rock,'' has just released his first album in five years. ''Sentimental Hygiene'' (Virgin) is a star-studded production whose guests include Bob Dylan, Neil Young, Don Henley, George Clinton and members of R.E.M.
Despite all the big names on the album, the sound of the record is far from high-gloss, and Mr. Zevon's sardonic, self-mocking humor cuts a dangerously zany swath. The title song is a characteristically double-edged reflection in which the narrator pleads for some romantic peace but ridicules the true love he wants by giving it the sarcastic, clinical label of ''sentimental hygiene.'' Another of his songs, ''The Factory,'' bears superficial resemblance to Bruce Springsteen's jackhammer evocations of working-class frustration. But where Mr. Springsteen's narrators tend to be noble victims, Mr. Zevon's protagonist is a loudmouthed firecracker who sneers, ''Yes sir, no sir, yes sir, no sir,'' behind his bosses' backs.
The album's boldest cut, ''Leave My Monkey Alone,'' is an ultra-concise history of a Mau Mau uprising against the British, arranged by the funk impresario George Clinton.
''In the course of writing it, I studied contemporary African history,'' Mr. Zevon said last week. ''The song is not politically judgmental. I've always tended to see both sides of an argument. It was very exciting for me to meet Bob Dylan, who plays harmonica on 'The Factory.' since I've always felt he invented my job.''
Mr. Zevon has another side to his musical personality. As a youth, he was schooled in serial composition, and used to play his work for Igor Stravinsky and Robert Craft. ''Nocturne,'' the B side of the album's first single, he described as ''a two-minute homage to Elliott Carter.''
''Writing classical music involves more sustained excitement than writing songs, which for me are more about lyrics than about music,'' he said. ''Someday I would like to write a string quartet.''
 
Metal Momentum
Metalmania continues to gather momentum on the pop charts, as the new Motley Crue album ''Girls, Girls, Girls'' (Elektra), which shipped 1.3 million copies, debuts at No. 5 on Billboard's pop album chart. With ''Whitesnake'' (Geffen) at No. 2, Bon Jovi's ''Slippery When Wet'' (Mercury) at No. 3, Poison's ''Look What the Cat Dragged In'' (Enigma/ Capitol) at No. 4, and Ozzy Osbourne and Randy Rhoads's ''Tribute'' (CBS Associated) at No. 6, rock that ranges from hard to crunchingly metallic has a firmer grip on the pop charts than at any time in recent memory. One of the reasons for the resurgence is the ever-changing format of MTV, the 24-hour music cable channel which is programming more mainstream guitar-based rock and less new wave.
 
New Million-Seller
Club Nouveau's ''Lean on Me'' (Warner Brothers) has become the first single in 1987 to be certified by the Recording Industry Association of America as a million-seller - remarkable considering the precipitous decline of singles sales in the last three years. The typical No. 1 single now only sells roughly 500,000 copies.