TITLE: DILL-ICIOUS DINING OPTIONS STRETCH BEYOND PICKLESBURGH
TOPIC: Sports
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-07-18 00:00:00
SECTION: FOOD; Pg. E-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Business Ownership', 'Sports', 'Art']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.8068037147929783]

BODY:
Picklesburgh was voted USA Today's Best Specialty Food Festival in 2023. This year, it got bumped to second place, but we're still pickled pink with excitement about the festival, which runs July 18-21 on Boulevard of the Allies and in PPG Plaza in Downtown.
More than 60 vendors are selling pickle-related food and drinks, while crowds are expected to surpass 200,000 people over the four days. And as preparations for the Summer Olympics are ongoing in Paris, the first "Olympickles" will be happening in Pittsburgh - its three events being pickle eating, pickle drinking and pickle bobbing.
In terms of food and drink, Iron City Beer will debut IC Pickle, an exclusive pickle-flavored edition of the brand's popular IC Light Beer. Legendary local bakery Mancini's will be rolling out the PGH Roll 2.0, made with cheesy bratwurst and pickled cabbage in a spin on last year's version stuffed with Heinz pickle chips and chipped ham.
But if you've attended Picklesburgh since its founding in 2015 and want to try something different - or if you're looking for even more pickles after wandering around Downtown for four days - maybe it's time to explore some of the other dill-icious dishes the city has to offer.
Whether you're in need of a late night snack or a wholesome sandwich to enjoy, Pittsburgh's pickle scene has your back.
Daytime: Briny deli food
Deutschtown Deli has the classic dill cucumber pickle and much, much more. You also can enjoy their pickled vegetable cups, spicy pickled garlic bologna and all types of sandwiches filled with pickled fennel and red onion.
Founded in 2023 by Chris Kweder, Cory Hughes and Alex Feltovich, Deutschtown Deli is situated on the North Side, at 401 E. Ohio St.
After North Shore Deli closed down during the COVID-19 pandemic, the three "wanted to fill the void of a good sandwich at a reasonable price on the North Side," Kweder said.
The owners take pride in the deli's quality ingredients. While some of their meats are purchased from Boar's Head, their other products, including eggs and bread, are often locally sourced from farms in Pennsylvania.
"It's not cheap, but we feel it's important - though we also wanted to keep a lower price point," Hughes said. "North Side is going to start having a lot more higher end restaurants, so it's important to have stores where you can just pop in and spend $12-$14 on something that's good."
Feltovich pointed out that he has seen a rise in "pickle culture" in the last few years, including inventive delicacies like pickle cotton candy and pickle cocktails. But with roots in Pittsburgh, pickling has run in his family's blood for for a long time.
On Arlington Avenue, where his father grew up, "you'd grow what you could in the garden or get whatever from your neighbors and end up pickling it to get through the winter," he said. "It's definitely a thing of the culture here with the old mill families and the working class for a long time."
Hughes grew up in northeastern Pennsylvania, where Amish cuisine was a big influence. He remembers eating Amish pickled chow-chow, which is a mustard pickled summer vegetable mix. He enjoys dishes with acidic components and frequently incorporates them in the deli.
Many chefs in Pittsburgh have family pickle stories. For Mike Lambert, founder of the pop-up restaurant Pickle Boy, it's a family business.
During the week, Lambert bartends and waits tables at Soju, a Korean restaurant in Garfield. On pop-up weekends, he rents out the restaurant space and transforms into Pickle Boy's manager. On Sundays, he prepares the kitchen in anticipation of a flood of customers on Monday.
Lambert was surprised at Pickle Boy's overnight success. At their first pop-up on May 20, their products sold out hours before they were planning to close. They returned to Soju for a second time on July 1, doubling the amount of pickles they prepared.
Pickle Boy also offers a sample platter of curry and classic dill pickled eggs, dill pickle spears and bread&butter and dill pickle chips.
They have six types of sandwiches with vegan options, and their signature cocktail is the Pickle Boy-tini, a vodka or gin martini with Pickle Boy brine.
In classic family deli fashion, Lambert uses his mom's recipe for the veggie soup and his dad's for the three-bean chili.
"I always cooked with my parents growing up," he said. "Those were recipes that stuck with me, like 'Oh, I've made chili with that a million times.' Some recipes just get written into your DNA."
Lambert's wife, Jill DaVern Lambert, helps prepare drinks and the pasta salad, while his two brothers, Jeff and Max Lambert, assist him in the back of the house.
If you want to try Pickle Boy's food and drinks, look for updates on the restaurant's Instagram page, @pickleboypgh. The plan is to hold pop-ups once a month for the foreseeable future, Lambert said.
Next up, Lambert hopes to bring Pickle Boy to different host venues. He's trying to keep it flexible - possible future endeavors include bringing premade sandwiches to bodega-style restaurants or places where he may not have access to a full kitchen.
Nighttime: Fried pickles at local pubs
Ruggers Pub on the South Side is famous for being Pittsburgh's only rugby bar. It is owned by the Pittsburgh Rugby Club and is packed to the brim every time a major rugby event is streamed.
But it also is known for its thinly sliced fried pickle chips, a huge pile of which have been served alongside burgers since the pub's founding in 2000.
The kitchen goes through 15 gallons of pickles each week, averaging more than two gallons a day. It's an "absurd amount and a labor of love," general manager Alex Gordon said.
Although the pub on South 22nd Street is a long way from Downtown, Picklesburgh brings an influx of people seeking fried pickle chips to go with their meals.
"But honestly, people in Pittsburgh just love an opportunity to dip something in ranch any time of the year," Gordon said. "Pickle chips and ranch is the absolute best combination in the world."
Ruggers Pub is primarily a sports bar and will have special viewing parties for rugby matches at the Paris Olympics. But also it has a "devout punk rock following," and lots of vegan customers due to their extensive vegetarian and vegan menu.
"A lot of people that don't care at all about sports still love this place," Gordon said. "We're going for a friendly atmosphere instead of the stereotypical street bar, where it's chaos and people being rude to each other."
Picklesburgh runs from noon to 10 p.m. Thursday to Saturday, and from noon to 6 p.m. Sunday - leaving plenty of time to visit a bar or two for fried pickles and game watching after the festival ends. Ruggers Pub's kitchen closes at midnight every day.
Other pickle dishes you might want to try out before Picklesburgh include the pickle pizza and fried pickle dip at The Porch. They also sell pickle martinis and pickle bloody marys for those of age. Pickle specials there run until July 21 at its two locations in Oakland (221 Schenley Drive) and Upper St. Clair (120 Siena Drive).
Kinnia Cheuk: kcheuk@post-gazette.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Homemade pickles from Deutschtown Deli on the North Side.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up deli's pickle platter at Soju in Garfield includes curried and pickled eggs.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Deutschtown Deli co-owner Chris Kweder removes pickles from a container.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Fried pickles are a popular menu item at Ruggers Pub on the South Side.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up cocktails including Pineapple Turmeric Shrub, left, and a Pickle Boy-tini are served at Soju Restaurant in Garfield.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Ruggers Pub on the South Side draws rugby fans, pickle lovers, punk rockers and vegans and vegetarians.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up deli owner Mike Lambert, from Brookline, never expected his pop-up business to become an overnight success.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: The pickled offerings at Deutschtown Deli include eggs and vegetables.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up deli's Vegan Boy sandwich is paired with Mom's Veggie Soup at Soju Restaurant in Garfield.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Fried Pickles from Ruggers Pub.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up deli's dill and curried eggs sit next to dill and bread and butter pickles on Soju Restaurant's counter.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Deutschtown Deli owners Cory Hughes, left, Chris Kweder and Alex Feltovich.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Art work by local Artist Zev Woskoff was inspired by the name of the pop-up deli, Pickle Boy.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Alex Gordon, manager at Ruggers Pub, with the bar's iconic fried pickles.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up deli's Turkey Boy sandwich paired with Mike's Cream of Mushroom Soup.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Deutschtown Deli makes their own pickles.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: A Philly Transfer sandwich at Deutschtown Deli.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Alex Gordon, manager at Ruggers Pub, holds a basket of the bar's iconic fried pickles.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Alex Gordon, manager at Ruggers Pub, with fried pickles.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Deutschtown Deli tops their sandwiches with a pickled slaw.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Fried pickles from Ruggers Pub on the South Side.
PHOTO: Justin Guido/For the Post-Gazette: Ruggers Pub on the South Side draws rugby fans, pickle lovers, punk rockers and vegans and vegetarians.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazett: Pickle Boy pop-up deli owner Mike Lambert, from Brookline, never expected his pop-up business to become an overnight success.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up deli owner Mike Lambert, from Brookline, never expected his pop-up business to become an overnight success.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up deli's pickle platter at Soju in Garfield includes curried and pickled eggs.
PHOTO: John Colombo/For the Post-Gazette: Pickle Boy pop-up cocktails including Pineapple Turmeric Shrub, left, and a Pickle Boy-tini are served at Soju Restaurant in Garfield.