TITLE: WHAT TO DRINK AND WHERE TO PICNIC LIKE A PARISIAN
TOPIC: Sports
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-07-04 00:00:00
SECTION: FOOD; Pg. E-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Housing', 'Business Ownership', 'Sports']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
During the Summer Olympic Games in Paris, large crowds will throng the Eiffel Tower, the Louvre Museum, Seine River cruises and the Palace of Versailles. Meanwhile, many well-known restaurants and bistros will be closed for France's cherished five weeks of vacanes, i.e., summer vacation.
The ones that are open are sure to be packed. So what's a visitor to do?
Follow the lead of frugal, savvy Parisians: Buy a crusty baguette or two from Paris' innumerable bakeries and some delicious cheeses and cured meats readily available at fromagerie shops throughout the City of Light.
Pick up some easy-drinking, reasonably priced bottles of wine, head to a nearby public park, and voilà , enjoy a casual picnic at your own pace.
In addition to green space, Paris' numerous parks offer free admission, lots of seating on chairs and benches and attractive features such as fountains, well-tended flower beds, statues and sculptures and, occasionally, great views. Even when they're crowded, seats and patches of grass are usually available to relax and enjoy your fun feast.
Here are some sure bets to try:
A 'drop' wine on the Left Bank
The Seine bisects Paris creating a "Right Bank" and "Left Bank." The latter has long been a home for university students (Sorbonne University is located there), writers, musicians, artists and actors. Plus, the Left Bank features plenty of cafes, bistros, wines bars and wine shops.
So it was not surprising that over 25 years ago, American-born Juan Sanchez founded his cozy wine shop, La Dernière Goutte, at 6 rue de Bourbon le château in the famed St. Germain quartier (Métro Stop: Either St-Germain-des-Prés or Mabillon).
La Dernière Goutte in French means "the last drop." Rather ironic since Sanchez and his team still sell bottles and host popular classes (in English, if requested) on wines with no last drop in sight.
On my last visit, Sanchez's engaging and knowledgeable colleagues poured samples while talented northern Rhône winegrower Guillaume Clusel chatted with customers. The tasting becomes hectic at times, but nobody minds while sampling Clusel's tasty and inspiring wines.
Therein lies a key to Sanchez's success. He offers only estate-grown wines - in French, vins de propriétaire. They come from relatively small, artisan domaines where winegrowers work long hours in the vineyards with mud on their hands and boots.
At Clusel-Roch, Guillaume's family domaine, he makes wines from the famed Côte-Rôtie and Condrieu vineyards as well as from the Côteaux du Lyonnais, a reclaimed terroir west of Lyon.
Guillaime spearheaded the domaine's conversion to biologique (organic) winegrowing, which rejects treating vines with chemical herbicides, fertilizers, fungicides and pesticides.
Grasses and flowers grow between vine rows to promote robust life in the soils, a factor forcing vines to compete and become sturdy. Spring plowing reawakens vines and requires tremendous labor in the steep and rocky vineyards. Yields come in at low levels to enhance quality. After manual harvest and partial destemming, the grapes ferment as naturally as possible.
The Guillaume Clusel, Côteaux du Lyonnais, "Galet" is a Gamay-based red wine with guts and breeding. Aromas of cherries and blackberries waft up with hints of newly plowed earth and smokiness. Pure red fruits and mouthwatering minerality open in the glass balanced by firm, but entirely elegant tannins. All in all, it is a startlingly delicious, well-made wine. (Available in France at around 16 euros. In the U.S., it's around $25, consult wine-searcher.com).
After grabbing your bottle (or bottles), bread and cheese, walk to the Jardin du Luxembourg (i.e., Luxembourg Gardens), located at the meeting of Rue de Médicis and Rue de Vaugirard just over a mile south of La Dernière Goutte. A bustling, bourgeoisie neighborhood with upscale townhouses and fashionable retail shops surrounds the verdant park.
Like several other public gardens in Paris, Jardin du Luxembourg began as landscaped grounds attached to a royal palace. Queen Maria de' Médici launched the project in 1611.
Today, the French Senate occupies the original palace building, but the surrounding 57 acres provide an urban oasis offering meandering gravel trails, green lawns, shade trees, fruit trees, a large central fountain where children launch toy sailboats, tennis courts, statues, benches and lots of secluded corners to watch the world pass by.
In short, it is the perfect place for a relaxing picnic and fun people watching.
Revolutionaries and wine merchants
The Belleville neighborhood in the 19th Arrondissement on the Right Bank has a long history as a hotbed for working-class revolutionaries, immigrants and artists. Set in the slopes of northeastern Paris, the area's vibrant energy always attracted iconoclastic wine merchants and bistro owners.
Today, as gentrification creeps into Belleville, the neighborhood's essential spirit remains. This lively ambiance is on full display at La Cave de Belleville (51 Rue de Belleville. Métro Stop: Belleville), a grocery store selling good bread, tasty cheese and cured meats. It also is a cave à manger where guests enjoy tasty nibbles with either a glass or bottle of wine.
The massive takeout selections feature over 1,500 wine labels including from prominent organic Bourgogne growers such as Jean-Claude Rateau, Guilhem Goisot, Domaine Gouffier, Alice and Olivier De Moor and Domaine Henri Naudin-Ferrand. The selection of relatively inexpensive, dry Bourgogne-Aligoté white wines is especially strong.
Try winegrower Claire Naudin's delicious Domaine Henri Naudin-Ferrand, Bourgogne-Aligoté (around 15 euros). The grapes come from vineyards on sunny, limestone-rich slopes in the Bourgogne Hautes-Côtes.
The wine ferments with native yeasts and ages on the fine lees in stainless-steel vats. Bottled with minimal sulfites, the wine's ripe, round peach and citrus fruit balances with superb, zesty freshness and a touch of creaminess. It makes a nice complement to La Cave de Belleville's tasty cheeses such as Saint-Nectaire, comté, Morbier and a coolant (i.e., runny) fermier cheese from near Paris.
With bottles and food in hand, continue walking up the slope to the beautiful Parc des Buttes Chaumont. Until the 19th century, this area lay outside the Paris city limits. It was a former quarry and agricultural area that morphed into a refuge dump for garbage and horse carcasses. After the city annexed the area, planners reclaimed 61 acres to create a new sanctuary and park for the growing numbers of workers in the surrounding neighborhoods.
They succeeded magnificently. Today, Parc des Buttes Chaumont features lovely sloping lawns with shade trees, a large artificial lake, a grotto and waterfall, lots of gravel paths, plenty of seating and a stupendous view of central Paris sprawling below the hilltop. Again, it is a lovely setting for a quiet picnic.
Natural wines and a quiet park
Located in a quiet Paris residential neighborhood on the Right Bank, Square Maurice-Gardette features a relatively small (2.5-acre) park with mature leafy trees and quiet paths. Tourists rarely visit here, as it is not close to famed attractions. Still, it is a lovely place for enjoying readily available wines and picnic foods.
Right across the street from the park, Le Vin de Bohème (28 rue du Général Guilhem; Métro Stop: Saint Ambroise) conveniently provides a nice selection of organically produced "natural" wines from around France, such as another crisp white, the René Bouvier Bourgogne-Aligoté.
Just around the corner from the Le Vin de Bohème, butcher shops, cheese shops and bakeries offer all the necessary picnic provisions. It could not be more convenient.
Back at home
If visiting Paris is not on your agenda this summer, you can still slip into the French spirit of joie de vivre. Local French bakeries and pastry shops such as La Gourmandine and Gaby et Jules offer crisp, authentic baguette bread and delicious pastries. Chantal's Cheese Shop and Pennsylvania Macaroni Company offer wide ranges of French cheeses and cured meats.
For the wines, first try a crisp, dry white, the 2023 Château Motte Maucourt, Bordeaux Sauvignon ($12.99, PLCB No. 25494). Made from 100% sauvignon blanc, it offers a mix of ripe citrus and herbaceous notes. Served well chilled, it delivers a real thirst quencher.
For a red, try the 2022 Château d'Emeringes, Beaujolais-VillagesMotte Maucourt, Bordeaux Sauvignon ($14.99, No. 16749). Made from Gamay grapes, this easy drinking wine has plenty of ripe red fruit and freshness.
Cheers!
Dave DeSimone is a certified French Wine Scholar who has been writing about wine, food and travel for over 30 years, both in Pittsburghwww.daveswinecellar.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Hans Lucas/AFP via Getty Images: The Jardin du Luxembourg is a quiet place to have a picnic in Paris.
PHOTO: Dave DeSimone: La Cave de Belleville in Paris has an extensive collection of red and white wines to choose from.
PHOTO: Dave DeSimone: French wines are readily available in Fine Wine&Good Spirits stores throughout Pittsburgh.
PHOTO: Dave DeSimone: La Cave de Belleville, a wine bar in northeast Paris, is an excellent spot to enjoy a casual glass of wine.
PHOTO: Michel Rubinel/AFP via Getty Images: Small gardens on a part of La Petite Ceinture between the Thionville Street and the Buttes Chaumont Parc in the 19th Arrondissement of Paris.
PHOTO: Hans Lucas/AFP via Getty Images: The Jardin du Luxembourg, the garden open to the public, is located in the 6th Arrondissement of Paris, France.
PHOTO: Hans Lucas/AFP via Getty Images: The Jardin du Luxembourg, a garden open to the public in Paris, was created in 1612 to accompany the Luxembourg Palace.
PHOTO: Michel Rubinel/AFP via Getty Images: Small gardens on a part of La Petite Ceinture between the Thionville Street and the Buttes Chaumont Parc in the 19th Arrondissement of Paris.