TITLE: Reading: Can baseball save us from politics by bringing us together?
TOPIC: Sports
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-11-06 00:00:00
SECTION: SIL; Pg. 10
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Sports']
LABEL: [0.999999]

BODY:
May 2, 1948, and won by the Pirates, 6-4. In that box score, I found that Ralph Kiner had hit two home runs off Ewell Blackwell. When I saw that Pirates game in 1948, America was only months away from a presidential election, but I had no awareness of politics at my age and only a passing interest in politics when I was growing up in the 1950s. I voted for Adlai Stevenson in mock presidential elections in high school because Pittsburgh was a Democratic town, but my working class parents never discussed politics or voted in an election. In 1960 I turned twenty-one and was eligible to vote for the first time in a presidential election, but I couldn't have cared less about politics because the 1960 Pirates were in a pennant race. When Mazeroski hit his miraculous World Series winning home run less than a month before the election, he transformed Pittsburgh into a baseball heaven in the midst of a hellish political campaign. 
All of my memories, good or bad, of political campaigns and election results, of political tragedies and scandals, not one stands out like the day my father told me that Ralph Kiner hit those two home runs because he knew it was my first game, or the day that I saw a baseball soaring through the heavens at Forbes Field and the most assuming of ballplayers circling the bases and waving his cap. We may be political animals, but that's the stuff of dreams. "¢ Reading Baseball is a series of stories and commentaries by Richard "Pete" Peterson, author of "Growing Up With Clemente" and editor of The St. Louis Baseball Reader. Politics likely began when two cavemen threw rocks at each other to decide who would lead the tribe. This political season is proof that things haven't changed all that much. We've never been so divisive, so hateful, so vicious as we are now. By contrast, A.G. Spalding once claimed that baseball likely began with the simple act of a boy tossing a ball into the air. The poet Donald Hall, who wrote a book about Pirates maverick pitcher, Dock Ellis, saw this simple act evolving into "sons playing catch with fathers" and eventually into a game "on a diamond that encloses what we are." While politics, especially during presidential campaigns, have a way of bringing out our worst by dividing us, baseball, especially during the World Series, has a way of bringing out our best, by linking us together. Cultural historian Jaques Barzun actually went so far as to claim "that whoever wants to learn the heart and mind of America had better learn baseball." Over the years, novelists, historians, biographers and journalists have praised what they have called America's game for the way it creates a bond between generations of families. In "Wait Till Next Year," presidential historian Doris Kearns Goodwin remembered her father taking "his daughter" to her first game at Ebbets Field, and the time, after his passing, that she took her sons to Fenway Park. When she saw her sons in the place where her father once sat, she felt "an invisible bond between our three generations, an anchor of loyalty" linking her sons to their grandfather "through the game of baseball." In "The Glory of Their Times," baseball's first oral history, Lawrence Ritter wrote that his father inspired the book. At first, Ritter thought that his interviews of old-time ballplayers were inspired by the death of Ty Cobb, but later he realized that his father had died about the same time: "Still vivid is my memory of the day, when I was nine-years old, when my father took me by the hand to my first big-league baseball game. It seems to me now that I was trying to draw closer to a father I would never see again." Like Doris Kearns Goodwin and Lawrence Ritter, I have a vivid memory of going with my father to my first baseball game. I remember that my Pirates played the Reds in a game that took place in the spring of 1948, making me nine years old at the time. The Pirates won the game and Ralph Kiner, who would become my baseball hero, hit two home runs off Ewell Blackwell, a side-winding right-hander who had a reputation for throwing at batters and claimed Kiner was afraid of him. Years later when I visited Cooperstown and told the Baseball Hall of Fame librarian about my memory, he sent me a box score of a game played on