''Belfast Blues'' is full of impressive physical moments, when the flow of Geraldine Hughes's words is either emphasized or countermanded by the casually coiled force of her body. On Saturday afternoon at the Barrow Street Theater, where the show has returned to New York for a limited engagement, one moment in particular stood out: Ms. Hughes standing very still and straight, embodying a British soldier.
Would her trigger finger pull back, firing the gun aimed at the small boy whose provocations had worked just a little too well?
Of course, there is no gun, nor a little boy -- not onstage, at any rate. Save for a shifting backdrop of evocative images designed by Jonathan Christman and spare lighting (Mr. Christman) and sound (Jonathan Snipes), everything that exists in this 90-minute monologue is brought to life by Ms. Hughes, its author. Carol Kane, who directed, must have quickly seen that her writer-actress didn't need that much theatrical support.
Ms. Hughes has good source material: her childhood in a working-class Catholic household of eight in war-torn Northern Ireland. A boisterous humor hums throughout, but it cannot stave off the stress and fear of such an upbringing; not surprisingly, Ms. Hughes dedicates her performances ''to all the children who live in places of conflict.''
And though she convincingly inhabits a colorful crew of characters (including the inevitable alcoholic gambler of a father whose horses always come in second), little Geraldine is the engrossing anchor of this drama, which robustly juxtaposes childish wonder and brutal reality. As she grows older, the balance slides toward understandable teenage heartache in the face of relentless sectarian unrest, and the writing doesn't always remain as taut.
''Belfast Blues'' brings its audience to the edge of Geraldine's adulthood, when she is about to cash in on her ticket out of Belfast. She already has a film under her belt, having been spotted years ago by a visiting Hollywood director. And now she is headed to America. There are no clichés here about the land of opportunity, however. What's important, as is often the case, isn't so much what she's headed toward, as what she's leaving behind.
''Belfast Blues'' runs through Sunday at the Barrow Street Theater, 27 Barrow Street, at Seventh Avenue South, West Village; 212-868-4444, barrowstreettheatre.com.

http://www.nytimes.com/2014/09/30/theater/geraldine-hughes-returns-to-new-york-with-belfast-blues.html