An official in Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's Government has resigned in protest over an agreement between Britain and Ireland granting Dublin a consultative role in how Northern Ireland is governed.
But the resignation Friday night of the official, Ian Gow, the Treasury Minister of State, and threats from unionist politicians to make the province ''ungovernable'' will not deter Mrs. Thatcher from carrying out the plan, the top British official in Northern Ireland said today.
''Mrs. Thatcher is a very determined lady,'' the British official, Tom King, the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, said at a news conference. ''If the agreement is approved by Parliament, we shall see it through. We are determined to bring it into effect.''
The agreement, which emphasizes that the status of Northern Ireland cannot be changed without the consent of the majority of its citizens, will set up a ''conference'' of Cabinet ministers from Britain and Ireland that could address a wide range of controversial issues, including security.
The unionists, who want Northern Ireland to remain British, today called the agreement a betrayal and a major step down the road to a united Ireland.
 
Unionists Meet at Stormont
On Friday night, the Rev. Ian Paisley, head of the Democratic Unionist Party, and James Molyneaux, leader of the larger Official Unionist Party, met in what they called an ''alternative summit'' at Stormont Castle, which houses the Northern Ireland Assembly. The Assembly is being boycotted by both parties.
They said they would make the province ungovernable if the agreement was not put to a referendum. They also said that if the agreement was ratified in Parliament, all 18 unionist Members of Parliament would resign their seats and force by-elections before Christmas to give the voters of Northern Ireland a chance to express their opinion.
The British Government has already said it would not conduct a referendum on the matter.
''If the suggestion is that the Government give in to anarchy,'' Mr. King said today, ''we will not let the province down that way.''
 
British Official Criticized
''Mr. King is a recent immigrant to Northern Ireland,'' Mr. Paisley said, referring to the fact that Mr. King, the former Employment Secretary, assumed his duties in early September.
''Ulster people have grit, courage and strength,'' Mr. Paisley said. ''This is our country. We have seen successive Secretaries of State leaving in ignominy and shame, and I prophesy now: he will leave in ignominy and shame, and I will still be here with my colleagues, leading the unionists.''
''If the British are determined to reject the ballot box and not have a referendum,'' Mr. Paisley said, ''then they are making a choice for anarchy, not we.''
Mr. Molyneaux joined in condemning the agreement. ''The vast majority of all creeds and classes, Protestants and Catholics, are against and utterly appalled at the Anglo-Irish agreement,'' he said. ''It will drive an increasingly large wedge between the two communities in the province, to the point where no progress of any kind is possible.''
 
Catholics Support Accord
John Hume, a Member of Parliament and leader of the Social Democratic and Labor Party, which represents the Catholic minority the new agreement seeks to assist, said the agreement erased any justification for the use of armed force in pursuit of Irish unity.
''The British Government has declared that there is no British interest, strategic or otherwise, in being in Ireland,'' he said.
But Gerry Adams, a Member of Parliament and president of Sinn Fein, the political arm of the Irish Republican Army, repeated his contention that the agreement reinforced the partition of Ireland and guaranteed the unionists no change in the status quo.
Dorothea Scott, who lives near the Shankill Road, a working class Protestant neighborhood, called the agreement ''ridiculous'' and predicted trouble for everyone.
''I think Mrs. Thatcher's just gotten fed up with us, fed up with Northern Ireland,'' she said. ''My daughter asked me, 'Mummy, what does it mean?' And I said it means we'll be ruled by the south.''
 
Residents See No Change
Sandra McKay, who was walking up the Falls Road, a Catholic neighborhood near the Shankill Road, said she did not expect the agreement to change the situation. ''The violence has touched everyone's lives,'' she said. ''I don't think it will ever end.''
Mrs. McKay said she and her husband and two children were driven out of their home in a mixed Catholic and Protestant neighborhood in 1972 and had to live in a school for two weeks. In 1975, her mother was injured and her home badly damaged by a car bomb that exploded in her street.
Her husband is unemployed, she said, and her son had been unable to gain employment at a Belfast factory that has frequently been accused of discrimination against Catholics.
The new agreement ''won't do us any good,'' she said. She said she voted for Mr. Hume's party but otherwise never got involved in politics. ''You're better off saying nothing,'' she said.
Today was the first day of the Christmas shopping season in downtown Belfast, and large crowds, including a dozen busloads of Christmas shoppers from the Irish Republic, gathered to watch a small but cheerful parade. It was unmistakeably a Northern Ireland affair: behind Santa Claus and the bands, and just behind the clowns, was an armored car full of police.

Graphic

 
Photo of the Rev. Ian Paisley and James Molyneaux at news conference in Belfast (Reuters)