As the camera sweeps over gorgeous green hills, it settles on the cramped, urban cluster of Belfast. There, at an exuberant loyalist parade, an I.R.A. sympathizer surreptitiously passes a tape to an American human-rights activist; the transaction turns out to be a death warrant. "Hidden Agenda," the English director Ken Loach's lucid political thriller about Northern Ireland in the 1980's, is bracketed by such contrasts.
It begins with a quote from Margaret Thatcher insisting that Northern Ireland is part of Britain. It ends with one from a former British intelligence agent, stating, "There are two laws running this country: one for the security forces and the other for the rest of us." But the film soon situates itself between those extremes, in a city that breeds murder and paranoia, a place where truth is never stark or easy to discover.
Though the story concerns political assassination and government conspiracies, the film's strength is that it shows terrorism and ideology in the cold light of day on Belfast streets, where violence from both sides is a daily battle with no end in sight. Most political thrillers opt for melodramatic darkness, but "Hidden Agenda" is all the more chilling because its atmosphere is so bright and ordinary.
The film's own political agenda is straightforward: the British Government is shown to be the villain very early on. At the start, an international group of human-rights observers gathers evidence of torture and killings, and of the "shoot to kill" policy by which the British security forces fire at suspected I.R.A. terrorists on sight. The film's human face is established by two American actors, Frances McDormand and Brad Dourif, as the observers. This casting reflects the film's assertion that if something happens to an American the British cannot sweep it under the rug.
We soon witness what Ms. McDormand's character, Ingrid Jessner, and a British police investigator named Peter Kerrigan will spend much of the film trying to discover. Two men -- one an I.R.A. member -- are ambushed and shot without warning by the police as they drive on an isolated country road before dawn. The police steal important anti-British evidence, then claim the car ran through an ordinary checkpoint.
Kerrigan, who arrives from England to look into these deaths, is clearly based on John Stalker, who spent two years looking into the shoot-to-kill policy and was removed from his job shortly before the investigation was finished. His dismissal caused an uproar in England. Like Mr. Stalker, Kerrigan encounters resistance from the local chief of the Royal Ulster Constabulary. And like Mr. Stalker, he places himself in danger by visiting the families of I.R.A. members who have been killed. Both Ms. McDormand and Brian Cox as Kerrigan are believably obsessed and jittery. But their major function is to convey the escalating sense of danger (Kerrigan finds a bullet and a warning note in his car) and their gradual recognition of the British Government's immense power to obscure and manipulate the truth.
"Hidden Agenda" takes on one scandal too many when it links Kerrigan's thwarted investigation to a right-wing conspiracy that powerfully influences British politics. At that point, late in the film, "Hidden Agenda" relies on talky exposition, pitting the heroic Kerrigan in a conversation against stuffy, unconvincing Members of Parliament. Until then it avoids the pitfall of didacticism and argues its case through its characters, working as methodically as Kerrigan conducts his investigation.
This politically opinionated, unsensational manner takes advantage of Mr. Loach's long experience creating semi-documentaries about such issues as homelessness and working-class struggles. The style of "Hidden Agenda" is not fashionable. But this quietly explosive film comes to resonate more loudly than melodrama.
 "Hidden Agenda" is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes violence.
 
Hidden Agenda
 Directed by Ken Loach; written by Jim Allen; director of photography, Clive Tickner; edited by Jonathan Morris; music by Stewart Copeland; production designer Martin Johnson; produced by Eric Fellner; released by Hemdale Film Corporation. Running time: 108 minutes. This film is rated R.
 
Ingrid . . . Frances McDormand
Kerrigan . . . Brian Cox
Paul . . . Brad Dourif
Moa . . . Mai Zetterling