In the barbershops, on the stoops, wherever everyday people talk about politics and the world, some are wisely asking: If America goes to war and invades Iraq, what will be the cost and consequences to them?
The news they see and read is filled with speeches from President Bush and those in his administration who argue fervently for taking out Iraqi tyrant Saddam Hussein. The rhetoric is full of patriotism and the war on terrorism.
I've listened to many who wonder about the consequences of war. These people are not unpatriotic - but they're dealing with the reality that if there are casualties they will look like them.
As an Army veteran, from a family of veterans, I don't take the prospect of war lightly.
The modern all-volunteer Army looks more like America - or is certainly more representative of the U.S. population - than are the ranks of Wall Street brokers, the U.S. Senate, or the corporate boards of the Fortune 500, whose children do not fill the ranks of the military. The modern volunteer Army, in particular the combat units, are disproportionately filled with people from black, brown, and working-class white families.
I am afraid that there is a false sense among many Americans that casualties in a conflict with Iraq will be slight. Our experiences in the gulf war and Serbia have persuaded too many that modern warfare is a bloodless enterprise fought at a distance - that with highly sophisticated technology such as Stealth planes, pilotless drones, night-vision cameras, and smart bombs, there will be minimal casualties. If conflict becomes up-close - so goes this delusion - we have highly trained and specialized forces that can demoralize, decimate, and subdue the enemy.
After all, in Desert Storm, technology helped the United States and its allies smash the Iraqi army and run it out of Kuwait with relatively little loss of American life.
But this isn't invading Kuwait to throw out the Iraqis; this is invading Iraq to throw out Saddam. Invasion will entail more than the safe superiority of air power. There was little cover in the desert for Iraqi troops in the gulf war. But if we have to invade Baghdad, there will be house-to-house combat, and casualties may be high.
As for the public, still caught up in the patriotism and memory of Sept. 11, debate will soon begin in Congress over going to war in Iraq. Has the President given clear enough evidence that Saddam is such a threat to our personal and national interests that we should go to war? Does Saddam really have (or will he soon get) weapons of mass destruction that are a present, imminent threat to America? Why go to war with Iraq, and not China and North Korea, two nations that clearly have weapons of mass destructions and can deliver them? And let's say we rout Saddam. What is the plan after that?
Well, after Saudi Arabia, Iraq has the most oil in the Middle East. But if the American public believed oil was the real reason to invade, that public would demand a better reason or withhold support. Yet on Friday I watched some Wall Street TV analysts say openly that a war with Iraq will be good for the economy and business. It is said that U.S. oil interests are hoping for a war.
No matter what the power elite think the war is about, for people at home, it's about casualties. There were casualties in the gulf war, many the result of friendly fire, mistakes, and accidents. A friend of mine lost her son, a physician killed when the vehicle he was riding in overturned. Her loss, in a war many people think of as glorious and triumphant, was profound and painful, as such losses are to all families.
Those who represent the American people in Congress should be considering that reality. Many of their constituents are. These are Americans who do not always fly the flag. But their questions are in fact patriotic, asked in the country's best interest - their own. Best ask now rather than after the first body bags arrive.
Contact Acel Moore at 215-854-4533 or amoore@phillynews.com.