After more than five weeks of negotiations, Israeli Prime Minister-elect Ehud Barak is on the verge of assembling a coalition government that he believes will allow him to pursue a peace agreement with Israel's Arab neighbors. It now appears unlikely, however, that the coalition will include the defeated Likud Party of outgoing Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu.
With the 45-day deadline on forming a new government approaching, Barak late yesterday was conducting what appeared to be the final round of negotiations on an alliance with the ultra-Orthodox Shas party, which would give him as much as a 77-seat majority in Israel's 120-seat parliament, the Knesset.
The Likud, which had been vying with Shas to be included in Barak's government, has declared it will stay out.
"We will battle this government from the opposition benches," said interim party leader Ariel Sharon, who just days ago was touted as a possible finance minister.
In a terse statement to his party members, Sharon summed up what he called a final meeting with Barak yesterday. The meeting, he said, lasted no more than five minutes.
The Likud walked out of negotiations, Sharon said, after Barak refused to commit to Jewish settlement construction in areas of Jerusalem claimed by the Palestinians and declined to reject a return of the Golan Heights to Syria in exchange for peace.
Barak has not announced his choices for finance minister and foreign minister, but analysts predict the posts will be given to members of Barak's One Israel party. Barak has declared that he will hold onto the defense portfolio himself, and analysts say veteran Labor Party politician and former Prime Minister Shimon Peres will likely be made a minister of regional development, in essence a "minister of peace" to improve Israel's ties with Arab states.
The Center Party's Amnon Lipkin Shahak, a former army chief of staff, has been touted as a possible ambassador to Washington. Barak hopes to present his government by the end of this week and travel to Washington as one of his first acts in office. The deadline to form a government is July 8.
Shas was expected to sign its agreement with Barak today, providing the final pieces to an intricate political puzzle. Barak's government would then include three rightist Orthodox parties, as well as the staunchly secular Meretz party, which also is expected to sign the coalition agreement today. Meretz leader Yossi Sarid stands to receive the Education Ministry.
If a new coalition comes together as expected, Barak will fulfill his promise of fielding a diverse government of national reconciliation after a divisive campaign.
Although Barak won a clear majority in the May 17 elections, his One Israel party did not. Under Israel's direct election law, voters had two ballots: one for prime minister and one for the party of their choice. As a result, Barak was forced to juggle the often competing interests of an unprecedented 15 parties.
Shas supporters, mainly working-class Sephardic Jews from the Middle East and north Africa, voted almost overwhelmingly against Barak. But their representation jumped from 10 to 17 Knesset seats, making them a political force that Barak could not ignore.
Still, Barak demanded the resignation of Shas leader Rabbi Aryeh Deri, who in April was sentenced to four years in jail on corruption charges. Shas, suddenly plunged into a leadership struggle and facing severe financial problems, has been forced to settle for ministries such as health and labor to hang onto the funding lifeline that being in government provides. Shas had controlled the powerful Interior Ministry.
While including Shas would give a political voice to the country's Sephardic Jews, the new government also includes the Yisrael B'Aliya party of immigrants from the former Soviet Union, whose leader Natan Sharansky is expected to become interior minister. Sharansky's party has already joined Barak's government.
Barak's choice of Shas over Likud is a relief to many in Israel's peace camp who feared that Sharon's attempt to bring in Likud would hurt Barak's plans to conclude a peace accord with Palestinians, Syria and Lebanon.
"Shas is a very comfortable partner. They are moderate on peace," said Efraim Inbar, head of the BESA Center for Strategic Studies at Bar Ilan University. "Likud would be problematic. Sharon is like an elephant in a china shop. He could do a lot of damage."
At the same time, Inbar said, Barak's behavior during the coalition negotiations has reassured nationalists that he will not sacrifice Israel's security to get a deal with the Arabs.
"Barak has shown that he is a tough bargainer, that he is in no hurry. The far left feels uneasy and [Palestinian leader Yasir] Arafat is nervous," Inbar said, noting that Netanyahu immediately called Arafat when he was elected in 1996 while Barak has not.