Three years ago, Israel's conservative Likud party could bank on solid backing from working-class towns such as this one, much as Republicans in the United States count on Wyoming, Indiana and Texas.
But this election season, there is little good will here for the party's standard-bearer, Benjamin Netanyahu, who is trying to lead his fractured party back to relevance in a nation that is moving away from Likud's right-wing policies.
With few jobs and fewer opportunities, many voters in this struggling southern Israeli town look at Netanyahu not as the man who will save them from terrorism but as the man who betrayed them while serving as finance minister by slashing government aid for the poor as part of his economic-recovery plan.
"In Kiryat Gat, we feel that we are his victims," said Yitzhak Feldman, a guard at a shopping mall. "His philosophy as finance minister was to step on the poor. You can't perform an operation without anesthetic. He operated too quickly, too painfully and without anesthetic."
While terrorism dominates the political agenda in Israel, the economic troubles of places such as Kiryat Gat are playing a strong role this year as Israelis prepare to select a prime minister Tuesday to succeed the comatose Ariel Sharon, who had a stroke on Jan. 4.
A recent poll by the daily newspaper Maariv showed that in working-class towns such as this one, Likud had slipped to third place, behind the newly formed Kadima party and the left-leaning Labor party. In 2003, Likud easily outpolled Labor in this region.
The shifts taking place this year in Kiryat Gat reflect a political realignment in Israel. Polls suggest that Kadima could win nearly twice as many seats in the Israeli parliament, the Knesset, as either Likud or Labor.
With Likud struggling to reassert itself, even some within the party think that the U.S.-educated Netanyahu, who has been a driving force in his party since the early 1990s and was prime minister from 1996 to 1999, may have been the wrong person to lead the ticket.
It was Netanyahu's vocal opposition to Sharon's plan to remove Jewish settlements from Gaza and his attempted ouster of Sharon as Likud leader that sparked Sharon to form Kadima, which quickly siphoned off much of Likud's talent.
Netanyahu's campaign argument that the Gaza pullout triggered the stunning election victory of the Islamist militant group Hamas in January's Palestinian elections has found few supporters among Israelis, for whom the Gaza pullout remains immensely popular.
The hostility toward Netanyahu in places such as Kiryat Gat adds to that burden.
Netanyahu has been trying to address the criticism in the waning days of the campaign. On Tuesday, he appealed for skeptics to understand the difficult circumstances he confronted as finance minister.
"I could have refused to take the role upon myself or do nothing, and I would have been very popular," he told supporters, according to the Ynetnews Web site. "It was difficult, but we were forced to, we had to take the steps in order to save the state. And to those who are angry I say, 'We came to save you, and today we have to save the state.' "
But such appeals seem unlikely to change many minds here, where even the region's economic success story - a new Intel complex on the outskirts of town - has largely passed residents by, and the textile factories that had provided work are dying.
Likud Candidate Benjamin Netanyahu
Netanyahu, a former prime minister, is leader of the right-wing Likud Party.
The hard-liner, 56, was elected Likud leader after Sharon quit the party in November to set up Kadima. Netanyahu was prime minister from 1996 to 1999, a period of economic slowdown and little progress in peace negotiations. He was finance minister under Sharon, but opposed last summer's Gaza withdrawal, and quit two weeks before it took place.
Netanyahu wants much of the West Bank to remain under Israeli control, saying anything else would radiate weakness to the new Hamas-led Palestinian government.
Born in Tel Aviv, Netanyahu moved with his family to the United States as a teenager and graduated from Cheltenham High School.
He speaks fluent, American-accented English and has a master's degree in business management from Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
He is married and has three children.
- Associated Press
Contact Dion Nissenbaum at dnissenbaum@krwashington.com. Special correspondent Cliff Churgin contributed to this article.