ON a recent bright afternoon, New Yorkers blithely courted medical disaster at every turn. In Central Park, joggers with iPods bashed away their knee cartilage, risking futures of orthopedic reconstruction and tinnitus. Farther east, a middle-aged man gobbled a hot dog on the corner of Lexington Avenue and 68th Street -- conveniently en route to New York-Presbyterian/Weill Cornell's department of cardiology -- while the happy-hour crowd assembled at a bar on First Avenue to sip alcohol (hepatology) and smoke on the sidewalk (pulmonary oncology), apparently indifferent to the looming mass of Hospital Land just a block away.
  Hospital Land: no term better captures the vast medical domain that rises along the eastern edge of Manhattan, lying parallel to the Upper East Side but not quite of it. There, within an area running roughly from 62nd to 72nd Streets, and from First Avenue to the Franklin D. Roosevelt Drive, are gathered five world-renowned institutions -- New York-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Rockefeller University, and the Hospital for Special Surgery -- all devoted to the study and practice of healing.
Each of the five is a formidable entity in its own right; collectively, they cover more than 20 contiguous blocks, occupy many millions of square feet of real estate, and compose one of the most remarkable medical communities in the world.
  To enter the blocks of ''bedpan alley,'' as the area is locally known, is to discover a part of the city where ambulettes are as common as taxis, wheelchairs are more common than strollers, and the usual New York fashion palette of grays and blacks is overwhelmed by the sky-blues and aqua-greens of hospital scrubs. Even the trash is a little different here: a surgical cap tossed into a tangle of ivy, a latex glove draped neatly over a bike rack.
  Perhaps the most remarkable fact about this medi-tropolis, though, is how dimly it registers in the minds of most New Yorkers. Even among those who live nearby, it was, until recently, pretty much out of sight and out of mind.
  ''It was honestly never a big part of my life,'' said Judi Squire, a three-decade resident of the neighborhood who serves as co-chairwoman of the 10021 Community Coalition, a group seeking to limit local hospital development. ''Certainly there were lots of doctors and nurses in the area, and ambulances speeding down 70th Street, but the hospitals were always something over there to the east, on York. It was all very far away.''
  That is no longer the case. Much to the dismay of Ms. Squire and other residents, the institutions along York are undergoing a significant expansion that began several years ago and shows no sign of abating. Four of the five institutions are either engaged in or are about to begin significant building projects. Although some of the new construction is on land already occupied by hospital properties, much of it is farther to the west, encroaching on blocks well beyond the hospitals' traditional boundaries. ''Now,'' Ms. Squire said, ''I don't even know where it ends.'' 
  Where it ends, she and others fear, will be in the fatal transformation of their neighborhood into a canyon of medical commerce. ''Our beautiful neighborhood is going to be a nightmare,'' said Marlene Yokel, another resident, voicing the gloom that has settled over many who live in the area.
  To apply Elisabeth Kubler-Ross's five stages of grief, it would be fair to say that denial is no longer an option for these residents, but that acceptance is still a long way off. Which leaves anger, bargaining and depression.

One Hospital Leads to Another
  If the current expansion seems to cast the medical institutions as brazen interlopers, the fact is that their roots run deep in the neighborhood, all the way back to the turn of the last century, when York Avenue was still Avenue A and the tract where Rockefeller University stands was a last patch of scrubby farmland in an otherwise industrial neighborhood. Goats and cows grazed on the grasses on a bluff above the East River. On the riverfront blocks to the north, known years earlier as Jones's Woods, stood a large brewery and a lumberyard. The neighborhood to the immediate west was inhabited by working-class families, many of them immigrants from Eastern Europe -- ''30,000 Bohemians,'' as The New York Times estimated in 1908.
  The Rockefeller Institute for Medical Research was the first to arrive, after buying the land in 1903. The next year, workers began blasting away outcroppings of Manhattan schist, leveling the landscape and setting the excavated stone into three-foot-thick walls along the edge of Exterior Street (now the F.D.R. Drive). 
  For more than two decades, the Institute (later renamed Rockefeller University) stood alone on its bluff above the river, enjoying its growing reputation as the country's premier biomedical research center. Then, in the 1920's, the governors of New York Hospital, allied with Cornell Medical School, set their sights on land to the immediate north of Rockefeller's grounds, drawn by its proximity to the great institution. 
  Nobody would have suggested that the New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center, with its dazzling white walls and soaring Gothic arches, was anything but a boon to the neighborhood when it opened in 1932. Describing the new hospital as ''indisputably exhilarating,'' The New Yorker magazine declared that ''coming upon these buildings from the sordid streets around the bridge, dominated by the gasworks, is like leaving a dirty third-class railway carriage and suddenly beholding the ice-fields and the summit of a glacier.'' 
  The same could not be said of Memorial Sloan-Kettering's building, which opened in 1939, after a move from a castlelike dwelling on West 106th Street. The new structure was architecturally dreary, but the hospital, already the oldest and most prestigious cancer center in the country, added luster to the neighborhood nonetheless.
  The last to arrive was the Hospital for Special Surgery, another of the city's oldest and finest when it moved to its site along the East River in 1955. This was, at least for the moment, the final piece in the crazy quilt of medical institutions.
  From the start, the growth of the hospitals has been sporadic but inexorable. NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital/Weill Cornell Medical Center (as the hospital came to be called after a 1998 merger) long ago replaced its breezy courtyards with infill. Memorial Sloan-Kettering added several structures to its own superblock between 67th and 68th Streets. Rockefeller University extensively developed the southern portion of its grounds with residential and laboratory towers. 
  But as the institutions grew, they mainly grew inward, keeping to their original footprints while linking together in an informal campus. In some cases, they were linked literally by a system of underground tunnels, still used today to transport patients and equipment under York Avenue. In the 1970's, the city granted Rockefeller University, New York Hospital and the Hospital for Special Surgery air rights to build large additions over the F.D.R. Drive -- a deal that prompted much local complaining at the time -- but even then the hospitals remained far to the east and largely self-contained. 
  So it remained for years, hospitals and residents coexisting in relative harmony, each growing more prosperous; the hospitals by virtue of their reputations, the residents by virtue of rising real estate values. Ms. Squire remembers jogging near the hospitals and counting herself lucky to live so close to such great medical facilities. ''I always liked having the hospitals there,'' she said. ''At least, I never minded them.'' But that was before the arrival of what she calls ''the monstrosity.''

The Dark Tower
  The ''monstrosity'' is Memorial Sloan-Kettering's nearly completed 23-story research lab building on 68th Street between First and York Avenues. This tower has become the lightning rod of the neighborhood, figuratively and probably literally. Though not the first of Memorial Sloan-Kettering's westerly forays into the neighborhood -- that came in 2001 with the Sidney Kimmel Center for Prostate and Urologic Cancer -- this tower is significantly larger than anything built by any of the institutions in recent years, and has stirred up emotions commensurate with its size.
  For hospital administrators, the need for the building was dictated by Memorial Sloan-Kettering's core mission: to control and cure cancer. ''I think quite frankly the big prompter was the final analysis of the genome, which provided all manner of targets and new research opportunities in the cancer field,'' said John Gunn, the cancer center's executive vice president. ''Since that's what we do, and we were pretty well full up, we had to move.''
  To erect such a large building in a neighborhood zoned for residential development, the hospital obtained a variance from the City Planning Commission. Like churches, universities and other so-called community facilities, hospitals are entitled to such variances on the assumption that they improve life in their neighborhoods. 
  Local activists insisted from the start that Memorial Sloan-Kettering's tower did not in fact qualify as a hospital, since the building will be used for biomedical research, not care and treatment of patients. To some, the potential hazards of biological and chemical work that will go on inside the building gave extra urgency to the fight to block it.
  Adding insult to injury, many in the community, even those who ultimately supported Memorial Sloan-Kettering's right to build, perceived arrogance and inflexibility on the part of the cancer center -- ''an attitude of we're Memorial Sloan-Kettering and you're not,'' as Charles Warren, president of Community Board 8, put it.
  ''I think they made a mistake in doing that,'' Mr. Warren said.
  No offense was intended, Mr. Gunn countered: ''The arrogance was more not realizing how we might be coming across. We're extremely proud of what we do here, and we perhaps fell short in thinking other people would feel equally proud. We went on the assumption: 'Oh, we've been here 60 or 70 years. The community knows us. Many of them have been treated here, and they understand how important the work we do is.' Not all of them did.''
  After more than a dozen fractious community board meetings, and eventual approval of the project by the City Council, the case landed in State Supreme Court in Manhattan. In March 2004, a judge ruled in favor of the hospital, and construction proceeded. The building will open next year.
  Though this particular battle is over, the wounds are far from healed. Indeed, no sooner had the construction dust settled on East 68th Street than Memorial Sloan-Kettering announced plans to close the Beekman Theater at Second Avenue and 66th Street and replace it with a breast cancer treatment and imaging center. The Beekman, built in 1952, was one of the city's last single-screen theaters and a much-loved neighborhood institution. News of its demise made the pages of The Hollywood Reporter and ricocheted across Internet message boards, as cinema buffs urged one another to defeat the hospital's plans. But these exhortations proved futile. The hospital has nearly completed demolition work on the site, and will begin construction in March.
  The hospital is philosophical about such disputes. ''We don't want to go out of our way to be a pain with the community,'' Mr. Gunn said. ''To the extent there are issues, we'd just as soon work them out. But every once in a while, they're going to be things we can't back off of.''

Lost: The Human Scale
  That Memorial Sloan-Kettering should have become the bogeyman of development is ironic given that until a few years ago, it was the institution that had expanded least of all. And the cancer center is hardly alone in expanding now. Weill Medical College of Cornell University is completing a new center for ambulatory care and medical education at York Avenue and 70th Street. The Hospital for Special Surgery is about to build a new extension over the F.D.R. Drive. Most notably, NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital will soon begin tearing down a block of handsome row houses on First Avenue, between 71st and 72nd Streets, to build a 19-story building to house employees and medical offices. 
  A stroll along First Avenue reveals what is to be lost there. The old row houses look recently evacuated and forlorn. The names of former occupants are still listed on the panels next to the buzzers. Blinds and curtains hang in some windows. Downstairs, the windows are painted over. Gone are a restaurant, a health food store and the barbershop where Ms. Squire's brother got his hair cut for 20 years. 
  Ron Shiffman, former director of the Pratt Center for Community and Environmental Development in Brooklyn and a former member of the City Planning Commission, says he thinks that the toll taken on neighborhoods by large-scale institutional development may seem elusive, but is very real.
  ''You can't quantify it, but you can talk about it in qualitative ways,'' Mr. Shiffman said. ''What's lost are connections, social networks, the places where people hang out. The neighborhood dance studio, the place you send your kid for art class. These things that create a sense of community.'' 
  Easier to quantify are the gains: the jobs, the revenue provided to local business by increased traffic, the neighborhood's economic vitality. To Barry Schneider, a member of Community Board 8 and president of the East 60's Neighborhood Association, this vitality is precisely what he likes about the area, and why he supports hospital development. ''Take a look around you,'' he said. ''This is not an enclave in Chappaqua. This is a vibrant, multiuse neighborhood.'' 
  An unavoidable reality is that health care institutions are increasingly important to the city's economic well-being. According to the office of New York State Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, the health care industry accounted for an astonishing 370,500 jobs in New York City last year, more than 10 percent of the total, and has proved to be the city's most consistent job engine. 
  It's true that as operating costs rise, many smaller area hospitals are struggling financially, even shutting down. But when they do, they drive patients to larger, more prosperous hospitals, like the institutions along York Avenue. This, along with the fact that both Memorial Sloan-Kettering and Weill Medical College of Cornell University are in the middle of ambitious fund drives -- with Sloan-Kettering seeking $1 billion and Weill Cornell seeking $750 million -- makes it reasonable to assume that more expansion lies ahead.

Construction, Demolition, Death
  The drama near York Avenue is a story that plays itself out across the city every day in ways large and small -- and has done so for centuries. It's a variation of the theme Henry James fretted over in ''The American Scene'' a century ago, when he cursed the ''monsters of the market''-- skyscrapers -- that he found towering over the steeple of Trinity Church, ruining the view he had long cherished.
  The city continually walks a fine line between the past and present, between fustiness and heedlessness. ''It's the balance that's important,'' said Mr. Shiffman, of the Pratt Center. ''How do we make sure that we don't completely erase the past but we don't fear embracing the future?'' 
  In the end, maybe the reason New Yorkers can get so exercised about the dry and intricate subject of land use is that it combines our two greatest sources of anxiety: real estate and mortality. The changing of the city alerts us to our own transience, all the more urgently when the new shadow across the window is cast by a hospital. It's a reminder that not even New Yorkers get to be fit, fabulous and 29 forever.
  The good news is that great institutions like those in Hospital Land can deliver us, at least briefly, from the very mortality they force us to contemplate, providing the surgically enhanced knees, the repaired heart, the state-of-art treatment we might someday require, and thereby allow us to return to our lives and worry about more important things, like the hideous new building going up around the corner.


http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photos (Photographs by Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times)(pg. 1)
 (Photographs by Ozier Muhammad/The New York Times)(pg. 9)