To the Editor:
Re "Doctors' Real Thoughts on Disabled Patients" (Science Times, Oct. 25):
When envisioning barriers to health care, one does not think of the physicians as the barrier. I understand that physicians are tied to a system driven by time constraints and financial incentives, so it's not shocking that physicians discriminate against those with disabilities. This substantiates the need to re-examine health care reimbursement policies and practices.
Doctors have a legal responsibility to accommodate patients with disabilities and provide equitable care. Evading and denying care is a civil rights violation, a blatant disregard of the Hippocratic oath and a moral failure.
Lindsey Amina
Ewa Beach, Hawaii
The writer is the daughter of a disabled father.
To the Editor:
Let me tell you what my patients with disabilities have taught me over my 25 years of practice so far:
I have learned what a pleasure it is to hop on for a ride with a person who has a body that is one of a kind and is willing to tell you about it.
I have learned that it is downright awesome to watch a woman who has suffered a stroke recover, go to school in her electric wheelchair, get a degree and show us all what a strong, resilient and loving soul she has.
I have learned to be humbled by my many patients who have struggled with trauma, drug abuse and the stress of societal prejudice, and yet have learned to care for themselves and to live life fully, with soul and a sense of humor.
I hope all doctors will be as blessed as I have been to work with such superstars.
Susan Ferguson
Oakland, Calif.
The writer is a primary care doctor in inner-city Oakland.
To the Editor:
How can a doctor adequately treat any patients when, as one put it in your article, they are "seeing patients at a 15-minute clip"?
Who decided that 15 minutes was the amount of time needed to see a patient? I'm betting that insurance companies and money had a lot to do with that decision.
Let's start there: Many patients, not only those who might be disabled, need more than 15 minutes with a doctor, especially those of us who are older.
What can be done about these arbitrary limits? Why can't doctors push back?
Connie Knapp
Ossining, N.Y.
Kari Lake's Well-Deserved Defeat in Arizona
To the Editor:
Re "Hobbs Defeats Trump's Choice to Run Arizona" (front page, Nov. 15):
Kari Lake, like her backer, Donald Trump, has shown herself to be totally unfit to serve in any office of public trust.
As a candidate she did not worry about adhering to the truth. But if she had become governor of Arizona, any form of lying or deception would have been destructive and unacceptable to the state and to the country.
Her defeat was a vital step in the arduous task of keeping our democracy from being systematically poisoned by Mr. Trump and his cohort of election deniers.
Ezra Cohen
Deal, N.J.
Pence? No Thanks.
To the Editor:
"Pence Says 'Reckless' Tweet by Trump Endangered Him and His Family on Jan. 6" (news article, Nov. 15) reports that former Vice President Mike Pence has now finally criticized Donald Trump for Jan. 6 in a more forceful and direct fashion than he ever has before.
Well, hello! Mr. Pence now has his book to sell, and it appears that he feels shielded by the rising tide of contempt now directed at Mr. Trump as a result of last week's elections — further proof that Mr. Pence is a follower and certainly not a leader with a strong sense of self-worth.
What a spineless, oleaginous, obsequious sycophant he is, seemingly devoid of courage, perhaps thinking that he is protected by his pompous religious fervor.
A future president? No way.
C. Richard Brubaker
Novelty, Ohio
Don't Undercut Ukraine
To the Editor:
Re "U.S. Officials Split on Talks for War's End" (front page, Nov. 11):
Various U.S. and Western officials are dropping not so subtle hints that Ukraine should start plans for negotiating with Russia. This risks undercutting Ukrainian morale and, more important, gives Vladimir Putin hope that the Western support of Ukraine is approaching its limits.
Instead, the West should tell Mr. Putin that if Russia does not immediately stop targeting Ukrainian civilians and basic infrastructure, the West may be unable to restrain Ukraine from attacking inside Russia's borders and new, stronger sanctions will be imposed. Mr. Putin should not receive any gains from his war of aggression against democracy.
In addition, Biden administration officials should be stopped from airing foreign policy discussions and disagreement in the media.
Ron Kurtz
Alpharetta, Ga.
South African Coal
To the Editor:
Re "South Africa Faces an Uphill Battle to Transition From Coal" (news article, Nov. 9):
It's disheartening that South Africa is focusing on coal as it builds its industrial base. Instead of relying on a dying and polluting industry, it could put its resources into becoming a world-class manufacturer (and user) of solar panels, wind turbines, and energy-efficient appliances and building materials, thereby helping its economy and the planet.
Winnie Boal
Cincinnati
A Betrayal by Apple
To the Editor:
Re "China Turning Into a Liability for the iPhone" (front page, Nov. 8):
Working-class families have been betrayed by companies like Apple. The manufacturing base in the United States has been the foundation for companies to prosper and be in a position to create valuable new products. Yet Apple, like so many other Silicon Valley companies, undercut American workers by rushing to China and acquiring dirt-cheap labor.
Can American workers assemble iPhones? Can they manufacture computer chips? Of course they can. Shame on Apple and all the companies that see labor as something to subvert and exploit rather than a solid investment in our society and well-being.
We can only hope that next time the Apples of the world will build their empires with American labor.
Daniel Dziedzic
Rochester Hills, Mich.
When to Brush Your Teeth
To the Editor:
Re "Is It Better to Brush My Teeth Before or After Breakfast?" (Ask Well, Nov. 8):
As a retired dentist who practiced for 48 years, I vote strongly in favor of brushing after breakfast. First of all, if you thoroughly clean your teeth after the last meal or snack of the day (meaning brushing and flossing), there will usually be no "morning breath."
"Morning breath" is often the result of the bacteria on the teeth working on the food residue lingering on the teeth and excreting the waste products of that metabolism. I always counseled my patients to brush after breakfast to remove the overnight bacteria and remnants of breakfast — especially because they would be unlikely to brush again until bedtime.
Michael Marcus
Silver Spring, Md.
This article appeared in print on page A23.