On a clear fall day in Rome, I was sitting outside at Flavio al Velavevodetto, a restaurant in Testaccio, in a neighborhood that was once the city's slaughterhouse district and is now inhabited by both older working-class people and gentrifying youngsters. Flavio de Maio, an elegant, middle-aged businessman turned chef, sat across the table from me; a translator sat between us. I had come at the recommendation of a friend, the Rome-based journalist and historian Katie Parla, who told me that if I was looking for the epitome of Roman pasta, this was the place.
I had a question for Flavio: Why did he think that the simplest pastas of all — pasta alla Gricia, pasta cacio e pepe and pasta aglio, olio e peperoncino — were the darlings of Rome, appearing on nearly every menu?
"Because of the magic of water," he said without hesitation. "The key ingredient in all of those dishes is water. And if you use it right, you have a beautiful sauce, a cremina, thick and round and rich. And if you use it wrong, you have a pile of pasta with a watery sauce on top."
This had to rank among the most amusing and embarrassing moments of my career. Until then, I had thought those dishes — the first, simply pasta cooked with guanciale, the cured pig's jowl that plays a baconlike role in many Roman dishes, and pecorino; the second, just cheese and pepper; and the third, the classic late-night Roman dish featuring garlic, oil and chiles (and sometimes anchovies) — were supposed to be piles of pasta with watery sauce on top.
"No," Flavio said. "Let me show you."
He led me through the restaurant and into the unpretentious workhorse of a kitchen — a crowded, busy place not meant for public view — and began at once to work at the hard-used industrial stove. A huge pot of guanciale simmered on one burner; hunks of pecorino and Parmesan cheeses and bags of pasta sat on a side table. That was it.
In all three dishes, the secret, as it turns out, is to stir the mostly cooked pasta quite vigorously so that its starch emulsifies with the seasonings and added water. Flavio did this with deceptive ease, almost whipping the pasta as you would egg whites, using a fork in some cases and a large spoon in others, his wrist swiftly moving not so much in circles but in tight ovals.
The results were as surprisingly beautiful — far creamier than I'd ever seen these dishes — as they were delicious. I've included Flavio's recipes here. Further refinements are possible: Cacio e pepe can be made with fresh pasta (and even better with chicken broth instead of water), and many people use rigatoni in pasta alla Gricia, as opposed to the more traditional tonnarelli or linguine.
These appear to be the simplest preparations, and in their souls they are. But mastering both timing and technique requires a bit of practice. "You must get everything in balance, especially the intangibles," Flavio said. Just be patient. You'll know when you've arrived.
Recipes: Cacio e Pepe |            Pasta Alla Gricia |            Pasta Aglio, Olio e Peperoncino
Recipe: Cacio e Pepe 
It is among the most basic, simplest pastas there is, and suddenly trendy to boot. Why? Because when made right, it is incredible.
Salt
1 1/2 cups finely grated pecorino Romano, plus more for dusting completed dish
1 cup finely grated Parmigiano-Reggiano
1 tablespoon ground black pepper, plus more for finishing the dish
3/4 pound tonnarelli or other long pasta like linguine or spaghetti
Good olive oil
1. Put a pot of salted water on to boil. In a large bowl, combine the cheeses and black pepper; mash with just enough cold water to make a thick paste. Spread the paste evenly in the bowl.
2. Once the water is boiling, add the pasta. The second before it is perfectly cooked (taste it frequently once it begins to soften), use tongs to quickly transfer it to the bowl, reserving a cup or so of the cooking water. Stir vigorously to coat the pasta, adding a teaspoon or two of olive oil and a bit of the pasta cooking water to thin the sauce if necessary. The sauce should cling to the pasta and be creamy but not watery.
3. Plate and dust each dish with additional pecorino and pepper. Serve immediately.
Yield: 4 servings
Recipe: Pasta Alla Gricia 
The star here is guanciale, which is cured jowl. It is increasingly easy to find, but if you don't have it, use pancetta or even bacon. (It won't be authentic, but it will be really good.)
8 ounces guanciale (cured pig's jowl), cut into 1/4-inch pieces
1/2 teaspoon finely ground black pepper, plus a pinch
3/4 pound tonnarelli or other long pasta like linguine or spaghetti
1/4 cup finely grated pecorino Romano
1. Cook the guanciale in a large skillet over medium heat until deeply golden (adjust the heat as necessary to render the fat without burning the meat). The meaty parts should be browned and the fatty parts should be cooked but still slightly transparent. This will take 15 to 20 minutes. When it's done, add the black pepper and turn off the heat.
2. Meanwhile, put a pot of salted water on to boil. When the water boils, cook the pasta until it's al dente, nearly but not quite done and still a bit chalky in the middle.
3. When the guanciale has cooled a bit, and while the pasta is cooking, add 3/4 cup of the pasta cooking water to the pan, turn the heat to high and reduce by about half.
4. When the pasta is ready, use tongs to transfer it to the pan with the sauce. Stir the pasta as it finishes cooking, adding more pasta cooking water if necessary until the pasta is done and the sauce thick and creamy. Add half the cheese and a pinch of pepper, and stir vigorously to incorporate.
5. Divide the pasta among four dishes, and dust each with the remaining pecorino.
Yield: 4 servings.
Recipe: Pasta Aglio, Olio e Peperoncino 
This late-night Roman staple is astonishingly full-flavored. Start the water before you do anything else, because the sauce takes less than 10 minutes start to finish.
Salt
2 to 3 whole fresh peperoncini (small red chiles), or small dried red chiles
2/3 cup extra virgin olive oil
4 garlic cloves, thinly sliced
1/4 cup chopped Italian parsley
3/4 pound linguine or spaghetti
1. Put a pot of salted water on to boil. Remove the stems of the peperoncini, halve them lengthwise, then slice them into 1/4-inch lengths. Put the oil, garlic and peperoncini in a large deep pan set over medium-high heat, and cook until the garlic is translucent and golden, 2 to 3 minutes. Add the parsley to the pan, and turn off the heat.
2. Meanwhile, cook the pasta until it is aldente, nearly but not quite done and still a bit chalky in the middle. Drain, and reserve 1 cup of the cooking liquid.
3. When the oil has cooled for a couple of minutes, add 1/2 cup of the pasta cooking water, and reduce over high heat by about half. Add the pasta, and stir vigorously as it continues to cook. Add the reserved pasta water a bit at a time as necessary to finish cooking the pasta, and develop the thickened sauce. Season with salt, and serve.
Yield: 4 servings.
PHOTOS: PHOTO (MM28); As the Romans do: Pasta alla Gricia. (PHOTOGRAPHS BY GRANT CORNETT; FOOD STYLIST: MAGGIE RUGGIERO; PROP STYLIST: THEO VAMVOUNAKIS) (MM29)
'No,' Flavio said. 'Let me show you.'