Britain's opposition Labor Party decided today to hold a special convention to pick a new leader on July 18, about a month later than suggested by its outgoing chief, Neil Kinnock, who is resigning after Labor's fourth straight election defeat.
The decision to delay the convention beyond the late June date suggested by Mr. Kinnock came after protests by many members that party leaders were trying to hurry them into a decision to pick John Smith, a 53-year-old Scottish lawyer regarded as a centrist. He announced his candidacy today.
Bryan Gould, a 53-year-old New Zealand native who is the party's spokesman on environmental affairs, also threw his hat into the ring, saying that he would run for the deputy leadership as well as the top job, and that Mr. Smith should, too. John Prescott, also 53 and spokesman for Labor's transport policies, said he would also contest the deputy leadership.
Mr. Gould and Mr. Smith, who already has the support of some of the country's biggest labor unions, both promised an amicable contest and a thorough examination of the reasons for Labor's defeat last Thursday.
"Don't mourn -- organize," Mr. Kinnock told the party's National Executive today, a day after he and his deputy, Roy Hattersley, announced they would resign.
But Mr. Gould said: "We cannot simply change the face at the top and expect to win in 1996 on the program on which we lost in 1992."
Prime Minister John Major put the finishing touches on the reorganization of his government at 10 Downing Street today. He named a new Cabinet on Saturday, and filled a long list of remaining Government positions today.
Edwina Currie, an outspoken junior health minister under Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, turned down the offer of a job in Mr. Major's Government today, but she refused to say what it had been.
Mr. Gould blamed Labor's economic policies for its defeat. By promising to try to balance increased government spending with increased taxes on higher incomes, he said today, his party had shown "less than total sensitivity to some of the interests of the voters in the south of England in particular whose support we need."
Mr. Smith, who outlined Labor's proposed budget a month ago when the campaign officially began, had tried to reassure financial markets that Labor would not overspend or devalue the pound as Labor governments in the 1960's and 1970's had done.
Some members of the party, including some of the left-wingers Mr. Kinnock had sidelined in the course of his eight and a half years as party leader, had wanted to wait until the regular party conference in October to choose his successor. "What is happening now is some sections of the right are falling out with other sections of the right," said Dennis Skinner, a Labor Member of Parliament who supports a more radically socialist course.
The election was the third in a row, Prof. Anthony King of the University of Essex wrote in The Daily Telegraph, in which fewer than half of all working class voters had voted for Labor.
A post-election survey of 1,880 voters around the country for the newspaper by the Gallup organization showed that the biggest shift away from the Conservatives and toward Labor in the elections had taken place among skilled workers, foremen and supervisors, but the Conservatives had won anyway.