TITLE: C.E.O.s Are Tripping
TOPIC: Military
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-12-12 00:00:00
SECTION: BRIEFING
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/1.DOCX
LABEL: ['Union', 'Election', 'Military']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
Why executives are using psychedelics to get ahead.
Psychedelic drugs have come a long way. They once belonged to the counterculture ("tune in, drop out"). Now they are finding a home in the C-suite.
LSD, magic mushrooms and some other psychedelic drugs have been federally prohibited since the early 1970s. But people are taking them widely: Researchers at the RAND Corporation estimated that eight million adults in the U.S. used psilocybin (the main psychedelic substance in magic mushrooms) in 2023.
Today, a growing number of business leaders are using psychedelics, according to executives, coaches and researchers I interviewed. We don't have data on how often they trip, but many executives believe that the drugs can infuse their work with some coveted missing ingredient — calm, vulnerability, imagination. They sometimes take psychedelics on fancy retreats, where they lie blindfolded on mattresses while therapists guide them. I spoke to several of these executives for a story The Times published today.
Corporate leaders are often stressed out, fed up, creatively blocked or emotionally worn. For many in that group, two changes have made psychedelics more appealing. In today's newsletter, I'll explain.
The creativity push
Corporate culture has been loosening for decades.
Sterile, gray cubicle farms turned into bustling open floor plans. Technology companies added game rooms and ball pits to make their offices zany and colorful — places where workers could anchor not just their professional but also their social lives. Business leaders exhorted employees to exhibit imaginative thinking. (Sam Franklin, a historian, says this came out of a Cold War-era effort to distinguish freewheeling American companies from their rigid Soviet counterparts.)
There's a reason that people see psychedelic drugs as a way to boost creativity. The drugs increase the amount of information moving around in the brain, according to Robin Carhart-Harris, a neuroscientist at the University of California, San Francisco. While the brain usually tries to compress information, psychedelics create chaos and disorganization. That's enticing to people looking for out-of-the-box ideas.
Guides who lead psychedelic retreats also say that the drugs evoke deep waves of emotion. Some executives I interviewed revisited childhood memories during their mushroom trips. Some of them wept. And one briefly thought he had died.
That kind of emotional openness and disclosure is now routine in the corporate world. Best-selling management guides like Brené Brown's "Dare to Lead" focus on emotional intelligence. One C.E.O. went viral on LinkedIn for a selfie that showed him crying after he laid off two employees. Executives tell employees to "bring your whole self to work," a slogan spread in a popular TED Talk and self-help book.
The wellness boom
Business leaders have also become more candid about wellness at work.
Many have deemed mental health not just an appropriate office conversation, but a necessary one. The pandemic sent anxiety skyrocketing and prompted business leaders to make sure their employees felt comfortable discussing stress. Firms spend tens of thousands on therapy apps, meditation classes and stress management workshops. Some offer quarterly or annual mental health days.
As business leaders encourage employees to talk forthrightly about mental health, some are becoming more open about their own struggles — and the unorthodox tools they're using. Elon Musk posted on X last year about his use of ketamine, a drug that can have hallucinogenic effects: "I have a prescription for when my brain chemistry sometimes goes super negative."
Most scientists agree, though, that more research is needed on the possible side effects of psychedelics. There is risk when taking any unregulated drug, especially unsupervised.
A big shift
Big names in business (Apple's Steve Jobs, OpenAI's Sam Altman) have credited a psychedelic trip with creative insights. Now business leaders tell their colleagues that psychedelics are the reason they've become more calm and empathetic in the office.
Take Mark Williamson, the former chief operating officer of MasterClass, who began using psychedelics with a therapist in 2020 when his company was growing quickly. The experiences prompted him to mentor more young colleagues after one of them appeared in a vision during a drug trip.
A former Airbnb executive, Chip Conley, said he had seen friends in the business world use psychedelics to manage their egos and to find a deeper professional purpose — but he worries about corporate figures getting carried away. "There's a cultural cachet in some communities that suggests that if you're into psychedelics, you're cool and open-minded," Conley said.
Still, researchers are eager to learn whether psychedelics can have a measurable effect on business performance. Leaders get "stuck" in conventional approaches to decision making, said Rachelle Sampson, a business professor who is running a study at the University of Maryland. Perhaps, she wonders, psilocybin can break them of it.
Read my story here. I'll be answering questions from readers in the comments today.
THE LATEST NEWS
President Biden granted clemency to nearly 1,500 Americans, the most pardons ever issued by a U.S. president in one day.
Many of those being granted clemency had already been placed in home confinement during the pandemic.
The man charged with murdering Brian Thompson, the UnitedHealthcare C.E.O., had a notebook that described his rationale for the shooting, officials said.
The shooting has left workers across the health insurance industry frightened for their safety.
What happens when crimes are overshadowed by appearances? The Times critic Vanessa Friedman explains how people's looks can warp our perception of their behavior.
Syria's rebels are now trying to restore order in a fractured country. They called for foreign help in prosecuting atrocities.
People are still finding and releasing prisoners in Syria's jails. CNN captured on video the moment when one man learned that he was free and the country's dictator had fled.
Many are searching for an American journalist, Austin Tice, who disappeared in Syria, probably taken by the authorities, 12 years ago.
Biden's two top national security officials traveled to the Middle East to discuss the future government of Syria.
The F.B.I. director, Christopher Wray, plans to resign next month. Donald Trump wants to replace him with Kash Patel, whom he views as more loyal.
Trump appointed Wray in his first term but soured on him over the Russia investigation, racial justice protests and the F.B.I. raid on Mar-a-Lago. Trump called Wray's resignation announcement "a great day for America."
Democratic lawmakers praised the service of Wray, a Republican. Congressional Republicans criticized him.
Wray called stepping down "the best way to avoid dragging the bureau deeper into the fray" while preserving its values. He got a standing ovation.
Last week, Pete Hegseth seemed unlikely to win confirmation to lead the Pentagon. After Trump backed Hegseth and Trump's allies threatened to primary senators who opposed him, his chances look better.
Kari Lake, a former television anchor and 2020 election denier, is Trump's pick to lead Voice of America, a federally funded news broadcaster.
Far-right militia groups want to help carry out Trump's plan to deport undocumented immigrants. His transition team seemed to reject the offer.
Trump chose a Republican operative who tried to overturn the 2020 election to be chief of staff at the Office of Management and Budget.
The House passed a defense policy bill that would deny coverage of transgender health care for service members' children. Most Democrats voted against it.
North Carolina Republicans enacted a law that strips powers from the incoming Democratic governor and gives them to Republicans. It overrides the current Democratic governor's veto.
Joe Manchin and Kyrsten Sinema, two Democrats turned independents, voted with Senate Republicans to block a Biden nominee to the National Labor Relations Board, The A.P. reports. Republican appointees, who would have been in the minority until 2026, will now likely gain a majority once Trump takes office.
The Supreme Court allowed a Biden administration effort to address coal ash, a dangerous byproduct of power plants.
A Michigan Democrat won a House district filled with white, working-class voters. She talked a lot about the price of groceries — and very little about threats to democracy.
Representative Josh Gottheimer, a Democrat running for New Jersey governor, released a Spotify list of his most-listened-to songs that heavily featured Bruce Springsteen, the state's rock icon. He'd faked the screenshots.
South Korea's president defended his failed martial law decree in a defiant speech.
Britain will ban puberty blockers, a gender transition treatment, for anyone under 18, except in clinical trials.
Two star real estate brokers, Oren and Tal Alexander, were charged with drugging and assaulting dozens of women. Their brother was also charged.
Are you ready for guacamole to become a luxury? Trump's tariffs could raise the price of many basic goods, Rebecca Patterson, an economist, writes.
Here are columns by Pamela Paul on the joy of womanhood and Charles Blow on making friends after 50.
MORNING READS
Recovery Inc.: Eastern Kentucky struggles with opioid addiction, but rehab companies are booming there.
Devotion: A girl went missing in South Korea in 1999. For 25 years, her father refused to stop searching.
Black plastic: A study detected dangerous chemicals in household items. See if you need to throw out your spatula.
Pack your go bag: Extreme weather is becoming more common. Experts have advice on how to stay ready for an evacuation.
Ask Real Estate: "I want to renovate my rental. How much trouble can I get into?"
Lives Lived: The Amazing Kreskin often said that he did not possess any supernatural powers. His mentalist tricks, relying on body language and suggestion, dazzled audiences and brought him fame on late-night TV. Kreskin — he had a first name, but never used it professionally — has died at 89.
SPORTS
College football: Bill Belichick agreed to become the next coach at North Carolina, though he remains just 14 wins shy of the N.F.L. record.
N.B.A.: Trae Young and the Hawks advanced to the N.B.A. Cup semifinals after a win over the Knicks at Madison Square Garden.
M.L.B.: The Red Sox landed the White Sox pitcher Garrett Crochet, one of the best players left on the free-agent market, in an expansive trade.
ARTS AND IDEAS 
It was an eventful year in comedy. Netflix invested in live comedy, while Disney entered the stand-up market. Katt Williams beefed even more than Kendrick Lamar and Drake. John Mulaney and Taylor Tomlinson became talk show hosts. Joe Rogan jumped to the front of the conservative media establishment. See our comedy columnist's picks for the best of 2024.
More on culture
Dries Van Noten, the fashion designer and founder, named a successor.
A 30-year-old photographer, Hannah Kobayashi, was found safe a month after she was reported missing, The Cut reports.
The National Labor Relations Board ruled that "Love Is Blind" contestants are employees, a decision which could affect how reality show stars are paid.
Stephen Colbert joked that he was surprised by the brevity of Luigi Mangione's manifesto.
THE MORNING RECOMMENDS …
Make mushroom and leek pasta in one pot.
Buy a gift for people who are always cold.
Grate your cheese with better tools.
GAMES
Here is today's Spelling Bee. Yesterday's pangram was boycotted.
And here are today's Mini Crossword, Wordle, Sudoku, Connections and Strands.
Thanks for spending part of your morning with The Times. See you tomorrow.
Sign up here to get this newsletter in your inbox. Reach our team at themorning@nytimes.com.
PHOTO: Magic mushrooms. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Todd Korol for The New York Times FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)