Petr Bradac is one of the lucky few still working at Poldi Steel, a once-proud purveyor of specialty steels that gave the Soviet military some of its sharpest teeth.
But Poldi is in deep trouble. Bradac is worried. And in parliamentary voting yesterday and today, the unhappy steelworker may help put a left-of-center government into power for the first time since the 1989 ''Velvet Revolution'' overturned Communist rule.
''Nothing is certain anymore,'' complained the brawny Bradac, 30. ''I could lose my job soon, and my apartment rent is going up. . . . I will vote for the Social Democrats.''
Just a few years ago, the Czech economy was growing rapidly, a newly privatized Poldi was winning Western customers, and this whole country appeared to have a golden touch in its transition from communism to a free-market democracy.
But the privatization of state-run Poldi - which employed 22,000 here at its peak - proved a failure, partly because relations between its new owner and the government dissolved into acrimony. Today, a mere 800 workers remain, keeping a tiny portion of the huge complex alive as a subsidiary of another steel firm.
Working-class Kladno seethes with frustration, a situation repeated in different ways in many towns and villages across the nation.
This widespread disappointment and anger, triggered by failures such as the collapse of Poldi and corruption in the country's privatization process, lead many to predict that the left will take power with this election.
Polls show that up to five mainstream parties may win parliamentary seats, with additional seats going to the Communists on the extreme left and the ultranationalist Republicans on the extreme right.
Most analysts expect the leftist Social Democrats to place first but fall far short of a majority, which means they would turn to other parties for the parliamentary support needed to form the next government. That could include tacit support from the Communists.
Polls show nearly that one-third of voters - the largest single bloc support the Social Democrats.
''We are in a situation where the political right has disintegrated to some extent and the left has consolidated its position and is prepared to take over,'' said Jiri Pehe, an adviser to President Vaclav Havel - who constitutionally has an above-the-fray position.
Early results will come soon after the polls close this afternoon, but full official results will not be known until tomorrow or Monday. Coalition-building to form the next government could then take days or even weeks.
Some here fear a lurch to the left could have unpredictable effects on this country's hopes to join the European Union and its plans to join NATO, even though the Social Democrats express strong support for both those goals.
Since the 1989-'90 collapse of communism in Eastern Europe, two of this country's key neighbors - Poland and Hungary - have gone through changes of government from right to left and back to the right again. That experience, in the view of many here, has given them some degree of political maturity.
But in the Czech Republic, former Prime Minister Vaclav Klaus, leader of the strongest conservative party, the Civic Democrats, led the government from 1992 until late last year, when his ruling coalition collapsed and was replaced by the current caretaker center-right government. Economic growth has fallen from 6 percent at its 1995 peak to a current rate of about 1 percent.
Klaus' government took major steps toward building a free-market economy, and its success shows in the new glitter of historic Prague, a booming business and tourism center whose centuries-old buildings are rapidly filling with fancy boutiques and modern office spaces.
But the countryside and smaller towns have been bypassed by the new prosperity of the big urban centers. And large segments of the public have been soured by corruption in the Klaus government's privatization program especially the existence of legal loopholes that in many cases have allowed new majority owners of former state-run businesses to in effect steal from their own enterprises.