Police Maj. Vladimir Kanunnikov patrols a working-class neighborhood in northern Moscow, preaching the virtues of strong families and keeping tabs on criminals and troublemakers he calls "parasites." If a card game explodes in a brawl, or neighbors in a communal apartment square off with frying pans or knives, Kanunnikov answers the alarm.
And then there are the telephone calls that start with "Someone's going to get killed, either him or me," Kanunnikov said, describing the marital violence he tries to mediate before it explodes into murder.
Russia has become a world leader in homicide, chalking up close to three times more murders per capita each year than the United States, five times more than France, and seven times more than Germany. Only a handful of countries, including Colombia, outstrip Russia, although there are no exact global figures.
The soaring murder rate is part of a broader explosion of crime in Russia. The country's economic slide is partly to blame; so are the opportunities opened by economic reforms. There are more and better cars to steal, more and wealthier customers for prostitutes, more and pricier properties to fight over.
Jobs, education and technical training - to say nothing of salaries, pensions and other social support - are no longer guaranteed. Laws and policing have weakened, drug use has soared, and corruption is rampant.
"There's been a massive catastrophe of values, a loss of goals," said Igor Arshinov, a psychologist at Moscow's Institute of Neuroses. "Earlier, society was building communism. People knew it was idiotic, but on some level they still bought into it."
The country's murder rate doubled between 1990, the first year official nationwide murder figures were published, and 1994, when the level of murders and murder attempts reached 32,286. The next year, it began a three-year dip nationwide, but resumed its rise again last year, to reach about 29,550, according to the Interior Ministry.
The contract hits and gangland wars that fill Russian newspaper columns and television screens account for just a fraction of the murder toll. In 1998, about 43 percent of murders took place in private, up from 35 percent a decade earlier, the Interior Ministry said. According to the Russian Criminological Institute, which works with unpublished data, such murders have always been in the majority, accounting for 60 percent of the whole.
These murders are committed by neighbors, buddies, husbands, wives and children - not gangsters.
The Interior Ministry lumps them all in the category of "crimes committed against the background of everyday life." There are no separate statistics on domestic violence; women's rights advocates say that reflects what a low priority it is for law-enforcement agencies.
"Many people here don't accept that domestic violence is a crime," said Elena Potapova, the telephone-hotline coordinator for Moscow's No to Violence women's crisis center. "In our society, it's considered the norm."
Two factors of Russian life have consistently kept the level of everyday murders high. The first is alcohol abuse, which Moscow police say is involved in four-fifths of everyday murders. If alcoholism was checked somewhat in Soviet times, now it faces practically no constraints.
The second factor is Russia's chronic housing shortage. People cannot afford to move out of trouble's way, and the country's economic decline has put unprecedented pressure on families.
"Divorced couples continue to live in the same apartment, and so do all the generations, with old people, children, grandchildren, and new daughters-in-law," said Masha Mukhova, of the Sisters crisis center in Moscow.
"There's no exit. The situation itself provokes violence."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Maj. Vladimir Kanunnikov patrols Moscow for troublemakers he refers to as "parasites." (MIKHAIL METZEL, Associated Press Police)