Grandmothers gasp, children gawk and young streetsellers turn green with envy when one of Peter Terian's $ 135,000 Rolls-Royces races down Moscow's Gorky Street.
"People are finally getting a taste of freedom," says Terian, president of Moscow's first Rolls-Royce dealership. "For 70 years, no luxury goods were available. Now, Russians are actively trying to work and be successful. There's a whole new spirit (here)."
Two years after the Soviet coup that nearly ousted then-president Mikhail Gorbachev, Russia appears well on its way toward capitalism and democracy - at least on the surface:
Thousands of Russians, including ex-KGB agents and space weapons scientists, are working at hard-currency businesses like Pizza Hut, Radisson Hotels and consulting firms.
Streets are plastered with billboards selling BMWs, Sanyo fax machines, Gap jeans and Ben & Jerry's ice cream.
And up to 15,000 new Russian entrepreneurs are worth at least $ 1 million, according to Russian news reports.
"The sun is shining brightly on our motherland this day," says wealthy Moscow investor Andrei Gorchev, gambling crisp $ 20 bills at Moscow's Intourist Hotel casino. "We've waited 70 years for capitalism, and it is very, very sweet."
But only for a few. While Gorchev and a few other select capitalists celebrate, most of Russia drowns in despair.
Russian President Boris Yeltsin's economic reforms have sent crime and prices soaring, the ruble sliding and foreign investors running:
One-third of the country's 150 million people live below the poverty line of 8,500 rubles ($ 8.50) per month.
More than 1 million people are unemployed out of a workforce of 60 million.
Last year wages increased 1,300%; prices 2,500%.
"For traitors, thieves and scum, this is a holiday," says a communist leaflet being circulated in Moscow. "For honest people, it is a (time) of mourning and sorrow."
Nearly 60% of Russians believe life was better under communism, says a recent Gallup Poll.
"(Only) speculators and police who take bribes are rolling in bucks," says radio technician Alexander Moskvitin. "As for us, the working class, we're rolling in filth."
Many Russians are resorting to desperate measures:
Hundreds are traveling to Stockholm, where they purposely break the law for a chance to eat well and earn hard currency in Swedish prisons, says Sweden's Justice Minister Gun Hellsvik.
Inmates there earn up to $ 8.15 per day working or attending training courses.
Sailors recently sank a Russian military vessel in the port of Baltiisk so they could steal its metal parts and sell them, Russia's Commonwealth TV reported.
Citizens in Stavropol this spring charged a Canadian pilot $ 8,000 in landing fees for delivering humanitarian aid, ITAR-Tass news agency says.
"They're grabbing every opportunity they can. Corruption is rampant," says Hoover Institution Russian military expert Richard Staar. "There's nothing to stop them because the top brass is usually in collusion with them."
Crime is skyrocketing. There were 704 murders in the first seven months of 1993, compared with 462 the same time last year. In New York City, with almost 15 million people, about 4 million more than Moscow, there were 1,995 killings last year.
Of those, police say 150 have been contract killings. Police say Russia's 3,300 organized crime groups are armed with AK-47s and other weapons left over from the old Soviet army.
Police also say the number of prostitutes is expected to double in the next six months to 10,000 in Moscow.
Sociologists and police blame the crime on the economy and declining morality.
"This all started with the lambada dance, whose intent was clear to anyone," says Yuri Fedoseyev, head of Moscow's Criminal Investigation Department. "I am frankly embarrassed to talk about some of the things I see on television."
All these complaints have been translated into political turmoil that has yet to give Russia the orderly government it needs.
The communist-dominated Congress of People's Deputies continues to try - unsuccessfully so far - to impeach Yeltsin and reverse his reforms.
Yeltsin and his supporters "are pushing the country to the brink," warns Russian Vice President Alexander Rutskoi, "behind which lies blood, violence, chaos and the collapse of Russian statehood."
Yeltsin hopes to do away with Rutskoi and the Congress this fall when he's scheduled to hold new elections and introduce a new constitution.
He continues to promise that a better life is around the corner for the Russian people.
"Russia could begin to turn around in 10 years," predicts Georgetown University Russian studies director Harley Balzer. "While it will not be fun to live through this, most people realize the alternative is much more bleak."
But today's gloom isn't deterring Terian, of Great Britain, and other Westerners who have faith in Russia's new-found capitalism. He has already sold two cars and is about to close deals on four others. "Russia will get its act together," Terian predicts. "In five years, we'll see things we'll never believe."

Notes

THE WORLD; See sidebar; 07A

Graphic

 
PHOTO, b/w, Yuri Mashin, Agence France-Presse; PHOTO, b/w, Rolls Royce of Moscow