Growing up in western Ukraine, Valentina Kasatkina was warned against even glancing at the shuttered church near her home. Every Soviet authority figure - from teachers to youth-league directors - constantly reminded her that practicing religion was an affront to the state.
Ten years after the collapse of the atheistic Soviet regime, the 61-year-old pensioner no longer hides the deep religious beliefs she concealed as a child. So on Wednesday, undaunted by subzero temperatures and ankle-deep snow, she trekked enthusiastically to a familiar refuge - Church of the Deposition of the Robe in Moscow.
"Whenever I feel bad, I go to this church," she explained as she left St. Nicholas Day services with her 22-year-old daughter-in-law and her 16-month-old granddaughter. "It's amazing. It makes all the difference."
With the approach of Western and Orthodox Christmas observances, the Moscow church embodies the surge of religious expression that has spread across Russia since the Soviet Union officially ceased to exist on Dec. 25, 1991.
No longer fearful of arrest or official harassment, millions of Russians have found their spiritual voices. The Russian Orthodox Church, the dominant faith in Russia, now has more than 19,000 parishes in the country and other parts of the former Soviet Union, nearly triple the number in 1988.
Although critics accuse Russian Orthodox leaders of suppressing "imported" religions, a directory of Moscow houses of worship offers a diverse roster of beliefs, including Protestants, Roman Catholics, Muslims, Jews, Christian Scientists, Mormons and Jehovah's Witnesses.
With five brownish-gray cupolas towering over a working-class neighborhood in southern Moscow, the Russian Orthodox Church of the Deposition of the Robe is a touchstone for hundreds of parishioners. Struggling retirees, middle-aged breadwinners, and teenagers with only vague memories of communism all find escape from their secular burdens within its icon-encrusted interior.
The church, built in 1701, somehow withstood decades of Soviet persecution, which destroyed thousands of other churches throughout Russia. The stately terra-cotta structure is a beacon of reassurance in Moscow's Shabolovka section - both to the religious and nonreligious.
"This church has been standing here since the 18th century," said Natalia Savelyeva, a 29-year-old opera singer who regularly attends services. "I can't imagine the neighborhood without it, and I can't imagine what would happen if we didn't have it."
The Rev. Vasily Blankovsky, the 64-year-old head priest, says his congregation has grown steadily since communism collapsed, including a noticeable number of young people struggling for direction in Russia's bumpy political and social transition.
"They have temptations, and they have questions," said the gray-haired, bearded priest. "People are not completely satisfied with what they have outside the church. They are very unstable."
As in the West, attendance swells on major holidays and tapers off at other times. At least 60 percent of Russians consider themselves members of the Russian Orthodox Church, but little more than 5 percent attend church more than once a month.
At Father Blankovsky's church, the priests call the regulars "come in-ers" and the holiday visitors "drop in-ers." Weekend services typically draw about 200 people, with the number shrinking to as low as 50 during the week.
"There is something inside me that propels me to get up and go to church," said Andrei Vlasov, 33, who has built a Moscow advertising company that employs nine people. He was christened "late in life," shortly after communism collapsed.
Ivan Ivanin, 73, a pensioner who walks with a cane, began going to church in the early 1990s to pray for the souls of dead relatives.
"A lot of people turned to religion when democracy started," he said. "I feel like a great burden was lifted off of me. When I come to church, I feel so good."
Many recall firsthand experiences of Soviet-era religious oppression. Some defied the ban on religion and worshipped secretly. Others buried their beliefs until the post-Soviet constitution permitted religious freedom.
During World War II, Soviet dictator Joseph Stalin entered into a begrudging alliance with the Russian Orthodox Church to build support for the war effort, enabling the Church of the Deposition of the Robe and selected other churches to stay open under rigid state control. Nevertheless, priests were ostracized and subjected to repressive measures.
"Back then, we were outcasts," Father Blankovsky recalled. "Life was much more difficult, but I stood up to it."
The Church of the Deposition of the Robe is one of Moscow's architectural treasures. Drawing its name from the robe used to cover the body of Christ, the church narrowly survived fires that raged through Moscow after Napoleon invaded the city in 1812.
Inside, 18th-century icons climb gilded walls. A mural of Jesus on the cross, surrounded by angels, adorns the ceiling. Hundreds of votive candles in brass stands bathe the interior in a shadowy half-light. At the rear of the sanctuary, volunteers sell candles, icons and religious pamphlets.
"It has survived because of the faith of the priests and the faith of the parishioners who worshipped here," said Father Maxim, one of three deputy priests. "They never yielded to heresy."
Dave Montgomery's e-mail address is dmontgomery@krwashington.com.  

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
IGOR TABAKOV, Knight Ridder Tribune
The Church of the Deposition of the Robe is a touchstone for hundreds in southern Moscow. It was built in 1701 and withstood decades of repression that destroyed thousands of other houses of worship.