A 19th century writer described Russia as "the detainer of an immense amount of stolen property which will have to be disgorged on the day of reckoning."
 Now is the day of reckoning and Russia is disgorging. But it hasn't come about the way Friedrich Engels expected in 1866.
 Engels, Karl Marx's friend and co-author of "The Communist Manifesto," was describing the Russian empire of the czars. The "stolen property" was the vast territory ringing Russia on the south and west, inhabited by non-Russians, that had been taken by czarist force and was held by czarist oppression.
In fact, the "stolen property" is similar to the territory of the 10 republics that have now declared independence from the Soviet Union.
 The unraveling of the union is the culmination of centuries of Russian imperialism, compounded by a century of lies and hypocrisy regarding the relationship between communism and nationality.
 Or, to summarize 143 years of politics and ideology in one paragraph, you could say the following:
 Marx was wrong about the nature of nationalism. Lenin tested Marx's idea and, finding it erroneous, clung to it anyway and became a hypocrite. Stalin adopted Lenin's hypocrisy and built it into a bloody, bald-faced lie. Mikhail Gorbachev wanted to repeal the Stalinist lie and restore Soviet policy to its proper Marxist-Leninist root. But that idea didn't work any better for him than it had for Lenin.
 Last week, the error, the hypocrisy and the lie came tumbling down like so many statues of those who perpetrated them.
Czarist Russia
Almost every bit of territory that makes up the Soviet Union of the 20th century was controlled by the czars of the Romanov dynasty during the 19th century.
 The empire grew the way empires do, by conquest. Starting from a base in European Russia, the czars took over Siberia from the Mongols during the 17th century and captured Estonia and part of Latvia from the Swedish empire in 1721. Russia got Lithuania, Byelorussia, the central Ukraine, part of Poland and the rest of Latvia during the divisions of the Polish-Lithuanian empire between 1772 and 1796. Moldavia was ceded to the czar by the Ottoman empire in 1812.
 The Central Asian republics were remnants of the former Mongol empire. Russia gained control of Kazakhstan in pieces, starting in 1731. Turkmenia fell to Russia in the 1770s. Russia conquered Tashkent, the capital of Uzbekistan, in 1865 and the rest of the province soon after. The areas that later became the Tadzhik and Kirghiz republics were part of the same mid-19th century Russian drive into Central Asia.
 The three Transcaucasian republics had been intermittently independent but generally dominated by Persia or Turkey through the ages until they were swallowed by the Russian empire. Peter the Great conquered Azerbaijan in 1724. Russia lost the province for a while, then regained it for good in 1813. Russia took over the Persian portion of Armenia in 1828. Czarina Catherine the Great granted protectorate status to Georgia in 1782. Part was annexed in 1801, the rest in 1878.
Marx's mistake
Karl Marx believed that nationalism was false consciousness. People - especially workers - who were thinking clearly would identify primarily with their class, not their nation. The workers of nation A and the workers of nation B should not view one another as enemies because they happened to live in different countries. They were allies because they were all workers, facing a common enemy - the international owning class, or bourgeoisie.
 But the working class, or proletariat, was so oppressed that they couldn't see this clearly. Their masters could even get them to fight and kill one another in wars that only benefited the bourgeoisie.
 Inevitably, Marx believed, the workers would develop class consciousness. The international working class would unite, throw off its psychological and economic chains and build a new world order based on socialism. Eventually, national boundaries and national governments would wither away.
 History has not been kind to Marx's and Engels' expectation in many respects, and the question of nationalism is one of them. Nationalism and ethnicity remain powerful forces in human affairs, maybe more powerful now than ever. Wars and civil wars continue to be fought over it. German nationalism was at the heart of World War II. Irish nationalism fuels a centuries-old civil war. Turks and Iraqis still oppress Kurds, and Kurds still rebel. Yugoslavia is breaking up over it. And the developments of the past two weeks in the Soviet Union suggest that despite seven decades of quasi-Marxist experimentation, nobody ever forgot for a minute who was a Russian and who was not.
Lenin's hypocrisy
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin, although he never met Marx, shared his disgust for Russian imperialism. He referred to the czarist empire as a "prison house of nations."
 Before he came to power, Lenin argued that the non-Russian nations of the czarist empire should have the right of secession based on universal suffrage and secret ballot.
 But while Lenin argued that the small nations should have the right to secede, he argued that they shouldn't do it. This isn't as contradictory as it first sounds.
 Lenin's attitude toward the non-Russians was firmly rooted in the Marxian view that nationalism was a false and dying consciousness. Once the masses tasted socialism, their loyalties would form along class lines and cut across national lines. Lenin looked for a time when there would be no national boundaries and all that would remain would be differences of language and ethnic customs, which Lenin felt should be respected and cherished.
 A voluntary multinational federation could be a step in the right direction, Lenin concluded. A few months before the 1917 revolution, he wrote:
 "The closer a democratic system is to complete freedom to secede, the less frequent and less ardent will the desire for separation be in practice, because big states afford indisputable advantages, both from the standpoint of economic progress and from that of the interests of the masses."
 This near-contradiction captures almost exactly Gorbachev's position for the past six years.
1917
The chaos in which Lenin's Bolsheviks seized power in October 1917 makes this month's pandemonium a garden party by comparison.
 It was the second Russian revolution of the year. It happened in the middle of World War I, with German troops advancing on the Russian front. And it led to a full-scale civil war.
 In the midst of this, true to his word, Lenin declared that the non-Russian areas of the defunct czarist empire should have "the right of decision, free from every duress, by free elections, without the presence of the armed forces of the incorporating state or any more powerful state, of what form of national existence it wishes to have."
 But contrary to Lenin's expectations, most of the republics took him up on his offer. The following nations declared their independence in 1917-1918: Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, the Ukraine, Byelorussia, Georgia, Armenia and Azerbaijan. Moldavia became part of Romania in 1918. All but Armenia are among the 10 republics that have now declared independence. They are: Uzbekistan and Kirgizia (which made their declarations Saturday), Azerbaijan, Georgia, Moldavia, the Ukraine, Byelorussia, Lithuania, Latvia and Estonia.
 During the civil war (1918-20), Lenin established the particular form of hypocrisy that was to dominate his nationalities policy. He continued to assert the right of nations to secede. That right was recognized by the original Soviet Constitution and has survived in every revision of the constitution. But those who sought to exercise the right were soon invaded by the Red Army.
 The pretext was almost always the same. If the government of Georgia (or Byelorussia or the Ukraine) chose to remain outside Russian Bolshevik control, Lenin concluded that the oppressive Georgian bourgeoisie was in control and he was not obliged to respect the choice of this phony democracy. Only the Georgian proletariat could speak for the people. By Leninist definition, the Georgian Bolsheviks were the only authentic spokesmen for the Georgian proletariat. Lenin could always arrange for the Georgian Bolsheviks (or the Byelorussian or the Ukrainian Bolsheviks) to ask for the assistance of the Red Army to rescue the local workers and peasants from the oppression of the bourgeoisie and their allies in the West.
 One by one, this arrangement resulted in Red Army intervention and conquest of the territories that would later make up the republics of the Soviet Union.
 By 1921, the Bolsheviks controlled the Ukraine, Byelorussia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, Georgia and the Central Asian territories.
 The Reds had tried to recapture the three Baltic republics but, exhausted by fighting a civil war on a thousand fronts, Lenin gave up and recognized the independence of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Moldavia's annexation by Romania also was accepted.
Stalin
Josef Stalin, a Georgian, was the highest-ranking non-Russian among the Bolsheviks, so Lenin put him in charge of nationalities policy in the mistaken belief that Stalin would have a special sensitivity to the non-Russian peoples.
 Stalin gave no special treatment to Georgia. In fact, Lenin's last argument with Stalin, just before Lenin suffered the strokes that forced his retirement, was over Stalin's high-handed treatment of the leading Georgian Bolsheviks.
 Once Stalin consolidated his power in the late 1920s, he was capable of much worse than high-handedness. Stalin ran roughshod over ethnic sensibilities. He moved whole peoples around when it suited his purposes.
 Stalin broke Lenin's deal with the Baltic republics. After the 1939 Nazi-Soviet pact guaranteed him a free hand, Stalin annexed the republics by force, exiled or killed their leaders and launched decades of repression. The same pact enabled Stalin to take Moldavia back from Romania.
 The only non-Russian ever to lead the Soviet Union was its most aggressive Russifier. Stalin forced the Ukrainian schools to teach Russian instead of Ukrainian. After annexing Moldavia, Stalin decreed Moldavians would henceforward write their language in the Cyrillic alphabet in which Russian is spelled instead of the Latin alphabet (the ABCs that are used in English) in which their language had traditionally been written.
 Like Lenin, Stalin cloaked his actions in high-minded rhetoric. But under Stalin, the lies got much bloodier, especially in the Ukraine. Stalin's forced collectivization of agriculture resulted in the murder of thousands of Ukrainian farmers who hesitated to join the collective farms. When collectivization led to famines and mass starvation, the greatest losses were in the Ukraine. Even Stalin's bloody purges within the party fell disproportionately on Ukrainian Communists.
Gorbachev
Gorbachev came to office in 1985 intending to repeal the excesses of Stalinism, including putting Soviet nationalities policy back on a proper Marxist-Leninist basis. That meant that you tell the disgruntled republics that they have the right to secede, but you urge them not to do so. You offer to respect their language rights and their ethnic customs, and to grant them increased autonomy over their internal affairs. And you advertise your new economic policy as the rising tide that will lift all boats.
 This was the Gorbachev nationalities policy of the early years. It was received favorably even in those republics that had been most embittered. By 1987, Gorbachev was more popular in the Baltic republics than in his native Russia.
 But what do you do if the republics reply: Thank you for all the nice plans you have for improving our situation, but we will just take you up on your offer to let us secede.
 According to Marx's belief, they should have developed beyond national consciousness. But they hadn't. According to Lenin, if you guaranteed their right to secede, they wouldn't want to exercise it. But they did.
 Then Gorbachev started acting hypocritical himself. The constitutional guarantee of the right to secede is vague and general, he said. We need time to adopt laws spelling out the procedures. Perhaps the process will involve a waiting period of several years. Perhaps the Russians living in your republic won't want to leave and won't want to secede.
 After a while, the tone of the delaying tactics got nastier. You know I am committed to a peaceful settlement of all questions, Gorbachev would say, in effect, but there are still Stalinists in the party structure who prefer to settle things the old way and I can't always control them.
 In April 1989, pro-independence forces rallied in the Georgian capital of Tblisi. Soviet troops used guns and poison gas to disperse the crowd, killing at least 20 people. Gorbachev, who was on vacation at the time, claimed he had not given the order and promised to investigate.
 In 1990, Lithuania elected a non-Communist legislature and became the first republic to declare full independence. Gorbachev proclaimed the action unconstitutional and void. He predicted a catastrophe if the republics pressed for secession too fast and warned that he would not be able to protect them. His former admirers began to see him as just another Russian Communist who knows only how to crack heads.
 Sure enough, violent military crackdowns struck Lithuania in 1990 and 1991. Unarmed protesters were killed, radio stations and government buildings occupied. Gorbachev expressed regrets, implied that he was not in full control and continued to press for a new union treaty revising the relationship between the republics and the Kremlin.
 In March 1991, Georgia became the second republic to declare full independence. Nine republics tentatively agreed to Gorbachev's new union treaty, but six rejected the process entirely, reasserting their intention to secede: Lithuania, Georgia, Latvia, Estonia, Moldavia and Armenia.
 On Aug. 26, the day before the treaty was to be signed, Communist hard-liners attempted a coup. They intended, among other goals, to prevent the breakup of the union.
 Gorbachev was returned to office and again has called for the treaty to be signed. But now even the nine republics that had approved it say it is not enough. Neither Lenin's ideology, Stalin's brutality nor Gorbachev's charm has lured the non-Russian peoples of the region away from their national consciousness.
Piecing together the Soviet puzzle
Capsule histories of the 15 Soviet republics. Year in parentheses is when each republic was incorporated into the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, which was founded in 1922.
Estonia (1940) - Ceded to Russia by Sweden in 1721. Independent 1918-1940. Assigned to Soviet Union in Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 and annexed 1940. Declared independence last week.
Latvia (1940) - Part ceded to Russia by Sweden in 1721. Part taken from Poland later. Independent 1918-1940. Assigned to Soviet Union in Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 and annexed 1940. Declared independence last week.
Lithuania (1940) - Taken by Russia during divisions of Poland 1772-1796.  Independent 1918-1940. Assigned to Soviet Union in Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 and annexed 1940. First republic to declare independence, March 1990.
Byelorussia (1922) - Taken by Russia during divisions of Poland 1772-1796.  Brief autonomy during 1917 revolution. Declared independence after coup.
Ukraine (1922) - Taken by Russia during divisions of Poland 1772-1796. Brief autonomy during 1917 revolution. Parliament declared independence after coup, subject to popular vote, but agreed Thursday to new economic federation with Russia.
Moldavia (1940) - Ethnically linked to Romania, controlled by Ottoman empire until ceded to the czar in 1812. Part of Romania 1918-40.  Assigned to Soviet Union in Nazi-Soviet pact of 1939 and annexed 1940. Declared independence after coup.
Georgia (1922) - Became part of the Russian empire in 1801; won independence in 1918. Conquered by Red Army in 1921. On March 31, 98 percent of Georgian voters cast ballots endorsing independence from the Soviet Union.
Armenia (1922) - Oldest Christian kingdom on earth. Independent in the 11th century. Russia took it over in 1828 from Persia. Brief autonomy during 1917-18 snuffed out by Bolshevik reconquest. Before the coup, declared intent to secede subject to referendum.
Azerbaijan (1922) - Dominated by Persia until Peter the Great conquered it for Russia in 1724. Russia lost the province for a while, then regained it in 1813. Brief autonomy during 1917-18 snuffed out by Bolshevik reconquest. Declared independence Friday.
Uzbekistan (1924) - Conquered by Russia in mid-19th century. Declared independence Saturay.
Kazakhstan (1936) - Fell under Russian control in pieces, starting in 1731. Has declared sovereignty since coup but not independence.
Kirghizia (1936) - Captured in same mid-19th century Russian campaigns that conquered Uzbekistan. Declared independence Saturday.
Tadzhikistan (1929) - Captured in same mid-19th century Russian campaigns that conquered Uzbekistan. Has declared sovereignty since coup but not independence.
Turkmenia (1924) - After centuries of domination by the Mongols, fell to Russia in the 1770s. Has declared sovereignty since coup but not independence.
Data: USSR Facts and Figures Annual

Graphic

 
Map