TITLE: ANOTHER LIFT FOR DOWNTOWN; URA TO PROVIDE ADDITIONAL $10.3 MILLION FOR BUILDING CONVERSIONS IN CITY'S CENTER
TOPIC: Housing
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-11-15 00:00:00
SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. A-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Housing', 'Indebtedness', 'Business Ownership']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.9985800630876506]

BODY:
Pittsburgh Urban Redevelopment Authority board members have authorized another $10.3 million for office-to-residential conversions in Downtown while moving to establish a new fund to support such ventures in the future.
The $10.3 million approved by board members Thursday will be used for four building conversions. It is part of the $26 million the authority has earmarked for eight projects overall, seven of which were included in the nearly $600 million Downtown revitalization plan announced last month by Gov. Josh Shapiro.
Also Thursday, the board took the first steps toward creating a Manchester-Chateau Transit Revitalization Investment District that is projected to raise $53.9 million to support another big initiative - a $600 million North Side redevelopment featuring a giant Ferris wheel as well as related infrastructure and community improvements.
Of the additional $10.3 million authorized for Downtown, the biggest chunk - $4.25 million - will go for the conversion of a 12-story building at Smithfield Street and Fort Pitt Boulevard into 46 apartments.
Another $3.5 million will be used to help with redevelopment of the former YWCA in Wood Street, where a developer is proposing to rehab the structure and build a 20-story tower on top of it, creating 294 units altogether.
The URA also is providing $1.6 million to convert a vacant eight-story office building at 933 Penn Ave. into 70 apartments and $1 million to turn a 17-story office building on Grant Street into 165 apartments.
Mayor Ed Gainey attended Thursday's meeting and praised board members and the authority staff for doing an "incredible job" in helping to reshape Downtown.
"I think what we're doing here today is great. I think it's a lot," he said. "You guys have definitely put your foot into it in regards to driving this investment plan Downtown."
Mr. Gainey said the plan has been in the works for two years, adding that "everything that we talked about that we were going to do we're doing."
The four projects that won URA funding Thursday also have received $12 million in state redevelopment assistance capital funding.
Other properties targeted for conversion as part of the overall Downtown revitalization plan are an office building at First and Market, which will be transformed into 93 units for seniors, and the 44-story Gulf Tower, the Grant Street landmark that will be turned into 225 apartments and a 147-room luxury hotel.
The First and Market building previously received $4.8 million in commitments from the URA.
"This is a major investment in our region, Mr. Gainey said. "We have not seen this investment ever."
URA officials said the outlays will create or preserve nearly 1,000 units in Downtown, including a third of which will be affordable to residents with low to moderate incomes.
Beyond that, board member Sam Williamson said the conversion projects "will make every single other building Downtown healthier, which will help to protect literally thousands of good working-class union jobs for the folks who work in all of those other buildings and really tens of thousands of other jobs."
Mr. Williamson, vice president of the SEIU 32BJ union, added the rehabs should also help to stabilize the Downtown tax base, which has lost half a billion dollars in value as building owners have sought - and won - property assessment reductions in part because of high vacancy rates.
"This isn't one step in the right direction, but it is a desperately needed step in that right direction," he said.
URA board Chairman Kyle Chintalapalli, Mr. Gainey's chief economic development officer, said the conversion projects should be under construction within the next 18 months.
"It's been a lot of work. It's been a long time coming. I know there were plenty of folks who felt that some of these things maybe should have happened sooner," he said.
"But I don't think anyone expected, except for those of us working on it, that what we put forth was going to be so comprehensive and I would argue appropriate in scale to the challenge ... before us."
At the same time, the board authorized the authority to submit a letter of intent with the U.S. Department of Transportation's Build America Bureau for funding to seed a Downtown Pittsburgh development fund to help finance future conversions.
"Conceptually, we're trying to raise monies to further build out a development fund to provide additional mezzanine or subordinate debt financing for real estate development projects in Downtown Pittsburgh," said Tom Link, the URA's chief development officer.
Neither he nor board members said how much money the URA was seeking for the fund.
"While these first projects are important, sustaining that effort going forward is arguably even more important," Mr. Chintalapalli said.
The URA is hoping to submit the letter of intent within the next month.
On the North Side, the proposed TRID would provide an estimated $40.4 million for the Esplanade, the 15-acre riverfront development proposed by Piatt Companies.
In addition to the Ferris wheel, the first phase would feature apartments, a food emporium, restaurants, an outdoor amphitheater, a marina, houseboats and a 651-space parking garage. A second phase would include more apartments, a condominium building and a "destination aquarium."
The $40.4 million would be used to help finance affordable housing, the parking garage, site preparation, roads, sidewalks, bike and pedestrian trail connections, and other infrastructure-related work.
About $13.5 million would be dedicated to off-site work, including the conversion of Beaver Avenue to two-way, a Juniata Street underpass, public space improvements on Allegheny and Western avenues, and gap financing for affordable housing.
The 40-year TRID would be funded by the tax revenue generated by the Esplanade, with 75% of it going toward the on- and off-site improvements and 25% to the city, county, and Pittsburgh schools.
In his presentation, Mr. Link said that the 15-acre Esplanade site, part of which is owned by the URA, now produces just $83,651 in annual property tax revenue.
But once completed, the redevelopment would generate about $8 million a year in tax revenue. During the life of the TRID, the city, county and the city schools would still get about $2 million in new tax monies despite the diversions, he said.
Those three taxing bodies must approve the TRID before it can be implemented.
In addressing the board, Lucas Piatt, CEO of the Piatt Companies, said the firm is committed to "making the project a success."
He said it has had 15 to 20 reasons, from the pandemic to high construction costs, to walk away from the redevelopment since first proposing it eight years ago.
"There were a lot of reasons why over the last eight years we probably shouldn't be here right now. But I think it just simply underscores our commitment to the city of Pittsburgh and to this region," he said. "We're not going to give up. We're going to keep working hard to make this a reality."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Lucy Schaly/Post-Gazette: The Pittsburgh Urban Redevelopment Authority authorized another $10.3 million for office-to-residential conversions in Downtown.