TITLE: Congress scrambles to head off government shutdown; House GOP revises plan after Trump slams previous deal
TOPIC: Election
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-12-20 00:00:00
SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Election', 'Indebtedness', 'Health']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
"All Republicans, and even the Democrats, should do what is best for our Country, and vote 'YES' for this Bill, TONIGHT!"
President-elect Donald Trump
in a social media post
WASHINGTON   There is a notable absence of holiday cheer on Capitol Hill, as lawmakers are under pressure to avoid a late-December government shutdown.
After Congress reached a bipartisan agreement Tuesday to keep the government funded through March, conservative fallout over the beefy bill toppled it.
On Wednesday, President-elect Donald Trump came out against Congress' plan, introducing a last-minute complication.
"Republicans must GET SMART and TOUGH," Trump and Vice President-elect JD Vance wrote in a joint statement Wednesday. "If Democrats threaten to shut down the government unless we give them everything they want, then CALL THEIR BLUFF."
Trump later threatened Republican lawmakers who ignore his priorities on the government funding fight with primary opposition next election.
"Everything should be done, and fully negotiated, prior to my taking Office on January 20th, 2025," he shared on Truth Social.
With current funding to run out at the end of Friday, House members worked into Thursday evening trying to negotiate an acceptable alternative proposal.
GOP lawmakers said they had reached an 11th-hour deal negotiated among Republicans to keep the government funded and potentially avoid a shutdown.
Lawmakers had  reached a bipartisan agreement Tuesday on a continuing resolution, or CR, a stopgap measure to prevent a government shutdown and furloughs for thousands of federal employees over the holidays. Government funding expires Friday night.
But the over 1,500-page bill was  met with hailstorm of criticism, primarily from conservatives upset over the breadth of add-ons within the funding package, which range from disaster relief to pay raises for lawmakers.
"I was hoping for just a clean CR with a few things like disaster relief and an extension of flood insurance. Sort of a weeny Christmas tree," said Sen. John Kennedy, R-La. "This one looks like the Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center."
The holiday-themed nickname of "Christmas tree" refers to an abundance of ornaments, or extra provisions and amendments, hung on a must-pass funding bill.
"One of the worst bills ever written," billionaire and Trump confidant Elon Musk wrote in one of several X posts calling for lawmakers to reject the resolution.
Sen. Josh Hawley, R-Mo., said he spoke Wednesday evening with Trump on the phone, and the president-elect expressed frustration with House Speaker Mike Johnson's handling of the funding extension.
"Is this how you want your government to run?" Hawley said he asked Trump. "I mean, these guys can't manage their way out of a paper bag."
Following the backlash from Trump and others, Johnson, R-La., spent hours holed up in his office Wednesday and Thursday, visited by a rotating door of Republicans seeking a path forward.
Johnson came out with a revised version of the funding extension, slashing several of the add-ons that had raised GOP eyebrows in the first place, including a pay raise for lawmakers.
Trump came out in support of the new deal as details began to leak ahead of Johnson's official announcement.
"All Republicans, and even the Democrats, should do what is best for our Country, and vote 'YES' for this Bill, TONIGHT!" Trump wrote in a social media post.
The House was set to vote on the latest bill Thursday evening. The Senate also will have a chance to weigh in if the bill passes.
The temporary measure to keep the government's doors open would extend funding through March. It would also include $100billion for relief efforts after Hurricanes Helene and Milton devastated parts of the South earlier this year, along with funding for other disasters.
Several Democratic lawmakers quickly rejected the potential deal.
House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries, D-N.Y., called the new bid "laughable" and "not serious."
"Extreme MAGA Republicans are driving us to a government shutdown," he told reporters.
Trump and his allies called  for a temporary funding bill without many of the extra initiatives in the Tuesday bipartisan plan.
Trump and Vance also introduced another gigantic hurdle amid the looming government shutdown: raising the debt ceiling, or the amount of money Congress is allowed to borrow in order to pay bills it's already agreed to.
"Increasing the debt ceiling is not great but we'd rather do it on Biden's watch. If Democrats won't cooperate on the debt ceiling now, what makes anyone think they would do it in June during our administration?" Trump and Vance said in their statement. "Let's have this debate now."
On Thursday, Trump said Congress should eliminate the debt ceiling, putting his support behind an idea popular among some Democrats. Trump told NBC News in a phone interview that getting rid of the debt ceiling would be the "smartest thing it (Congress) could do," adding, "I would support that entirely."
The debt limit suspension ends on Jan. 1. The agreement allows a few extra months for the Treasury Department to use "extraordinary measures" to pay the bills.
What was once upon a time a relatively routine process, raising this cap has become an intense partisan battle every two years. And it's a must-do in 2025.
Democratic lawmakers criticized Trump's call for a shutdown, saying they wouldn't bail out their colleagues.
"House Republicans have been ordered to shut down the government. And hurt the working class Americans they claim to support," Jeffries said in a post responding to Trump's opposition. "You break the bipartisan agreement, you own the consequences that follow."
Any deal House Republicans cut will have to go through Senate Democrats - who have little incentive to agree to GOP demands, given they will have no negotiating power under the coming year's Republican trifecta of both chambers of Congress and the White House.
A group of Senate Democratic Appropriations Committee members huddled Wednesday night on the Senate floor with Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., but members did not indicate what Democrats may be willing to agree to. "Republicans have a hard time governing," said Sen. Gary Peters, D-Mich. "This just shows what we're gonna be dealing with over the next two years."
The White House on Wednesday accused Republicans of "playing politics" and taking the risk of creating "instability across the country."
"Triggering a damaging government shutdown would hurt families who are gathering to meet with their loved ones and endanger the basic services Americans from veterans to Social Security recipients rely on. A deal is a deal. Republicans should keep their word," White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre said in a statement.
Since 1976, the government has partially closed a total of 21 times - the last and longest one resulted in a 35-day standoff between then-President Trump and Speaker Nancy Pelosi from December 2018 to January 2019.
Contributing: Anna Kaufman, Sam Woodward and Terry Moseley
"All Republicans, and even the Democrats, should do what is best for our Country, and vote 'YES' for this Bill, TONIGHT!"
President-elect Donald Trump
in a social media post

Graphic

 
Speaker of the House Mike Johnson, middle, is facing rifts in the Republican Party over a deal to keep the government funded.
Jack Gruber/USA TODAY