TITLE: SHERROD BROWN KNOWS WHY THE DEMOCRATS LOST
TOPIC: Election
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-12-26 00:00:00
SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A-11
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Union', 'Election']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
Had John F. Kerry taken roughly 60,000 more Ohio votes from George W. Bush in 2004, he would have been president. Four years later, Barack Obama won the state by nearly five percentage points; he did it again in 2012, but by less than half that margin.
Then, Ohio swung hard to Donald Trump and the Republicans - and it has remained there since. Now, the man who was possibly the last Democrat capable of being elected statewide, Sen. Sherrod Brown, has been defeated and is heading home.
When the shift began
Costing half a billion dollars, Brown's losing battle against Republican Bernie Moreno became the most expensive Senate race in the country. Brown came up about three points short in his quest for a fourth term.
Why? Brown says the political shift in his state began with a signal event: the passage of the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993, the first year of Bill Clinton's presidency.
"Workers have slowly migrated out of the Democratic Party," he told me. "It accelerated as more and more jobs were lost. And I still heard [about NAFTA] in this campaign, especially in the Miami Valley, Dayton, where we still won, [and] up there in Mahoning Valley, where we didn't win."
Workers came to view Democrats "as a bicoastal elite party," he explained. "We were too pro-corporate. They know Republicans are going to shill for corporate interests. They expected Democrats would stand up for them, and they don't see that nationally."
Then Trump came along and switched the script, breaking with the GOP's long-standing free-trade stance to denounce NAFTA and other agreements, promote more protectionist policies and make promises such as ending taxes on overtime. "Republicans are now, for the first time, actually trying to talk to workers," Brown said.
Still, in November, Brown ran more than seven percentage points ahead of the top of the Democratic ticket in Ohio. Where Vice President Kamala Harris lost the state's union households by nine points, the senator carried them by 13.
The miners' canary
On Tuesday, Brown gave his final speech on the Senate floor. Occasionally choking up, he stood at a desk that had once belonged to Sen. Robert F. Kennedy of New York - something he discovered on his first day in the chamber, when he saw Kennedy's signature in a drawer.
As Brown invariably does, he wore a bright white lapel pin given to him decades ago by a steelworker in Lorain. It depicts a caged canary. "At the turn of the last century, coal miners took the canary down into the mines with them to warn them of poisonous gases," he said.
"The mine worker in those days knew he didn't have a union strong enough or a government that cared enough to look out for him. He was on his own. Over the last century and a half, we have done so much to change that. And all of those fights required going up against powerful special interests."
That day, 40 or so of his Senate colleagues who had gathered to hear Brown's remarks wore identical pins in his honor.
I caught up with Brown the morning after that Senate speech. His suite on the fifth floor of the Hart Office Building, where we spoke, was all but empty, the walls and desks already bare.
But although he himself will no longer be there come January, Brown insists that Democrats can - and must - win back the votes of working-class Americans. Those voters may disagree with some of the party's stances on social issues, such as guns, abortion, crime and immigration, but will return to the fold "if we stay on economic issues and do it right."
"We have to sharpen our message. I don't look at politics left and right. It's who's on your side," he said. "Work really binds. I mean, what do we have in common? The term 'dignity of work' really cuts across all lines."
He'll be back
Brown, 72, refused to call that speech a farewell. "It is not - I promise you - the last time you will hear from me," he said. Indeed, in the waning hours of the congressional session, Brown notched one last major achievement: passage of a bill that will give millions of public sector retirees full Social Security benefits, instead of the reduced payments they currently receive.
His future options include running again for the Senate in 2026, when there will be a special election to fill the unexpired term of the seat now held by Vice President-elect JD Vance.
I hope he does, because few have so ardently championed the value of work. And his, it is clear, is not finished.
Karen Tumulty is an associate editor and columnist for the Washington Post.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sue Ogrocki/Associated Press: Sherrod Brown fills out his 2024 ballot with his grandson, Milo Molina.