TITLE: DEMS AIMING TO MAKE GAINS ACROSS RURAL PA.; SUPPORT IN DEEP RED COUNTIES WILL LIKELY MAKE OR BREAK KAMALA HARRIS' CHANCES OF CARRYING THE STATE'S 19 ELECTORAL VOTES
TOPIC: Military
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-10-27 00:00:00
SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. A-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Education', 'Election', 'Military']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
MECHANICSBURG, Pa. - Pat Logan knows she's outnumbered.
Talking politics and enjoying a beer and a cigarette with a Cumberland County friend, the 73-year-old supporter of Vice President Kamala Harris was referring to the crowd at Johnny Joe's Sports Bar and Grille in Mechanicsburg.
But the same could be said across Pennsylvania's rural Republican strongholds, where the Democratic Party aims to narrow a long-standing gap before Election Day, even as Trump-Vance signs still dominate roadways along cornfields, dairy farms and small neighborhoods just outside the region's major population centers.
"I like how she wants to work for the middle class," said Ms. Logan, as Ms. Harris and Republican nominee and former President Donald Trump campaign ads flashed on TVs overhead between commercials for Coors Light, allergy medication and Cracker Barrel.
An independent retiree who has previously voted for "either side if it's a decent person," Ms. Logan lamented the possibility of continued Trump administration corporate tax cuts. And she embraced Democrats' attacks on corporate greed and price gouging.
"I want an explanation from Trump on why the wealthy don't have to pay taxes," she said. "They're cheating us from the top."
Cumberland, Lancaster, Union and York counties in 2020 gave Trump 72% of their votes collectively - a 200,000-ballot advantage over President Joe Biden. Seeking out more voters like Ms. Logan, Democrats have deployed a significant get-out-the-vote effort and rolled out a policy framework to boost support among rural voters nationwide.
The Harris campaign recently pledged to recruit 10,000 health care professionals in rural and tribal areas, promised to give farmers the right to repair their equipment, and announced plans to implement grant programs and restore a Biden administration program that provided internet bill savings.
Andy Mrusko, a 73-year-old retiree sporting a Harris-Walz button on his suit jacket as he walked through Lewisburg earlier this month, said concerns about a second Trump administration privatizing or in any way cutting Social Security "makes me a nervous wreck."
Tim McNatt, a retired concrete and warehouse worker from Cumberland County, said international affairs and the candidates' character rank high alongside economic concerns.
"[Trump] doesn't support Ukraine," the former Republican said. "If Russia takes over Ukraine, what's next? Poland? Lithuania? The one thing he does do is defend Israel - but so do we, so do Harris and Walz."
Mr. McNatt, 64, said he switched parties because of Trump's track record of falsehoods and his criticism of the late Sen. John McCain, R-Ariz., a prisoner of war in Vietnam, whom Trump claimed was "not a war hero."
"They all lie a little bit," he said of politicians. "But one is a chronic liar and we all know who the hell that is."
But most Republicans in the region are eager to send Trump back to the White House. Some told the Post-Gazette that while they don't like Trump personally, they were better off when he was in office.
"If there's nothing wrong, what is there to fix?" said John Geltmacher, a former Mars Inc. worker in Elizabethtown who decades ago voted for Bill Clinton. He echoed Trump's attack on Ms. Harris that she's proposing economic, immigration and other policies that she could have tried to implement while she's been in office under Mr. Biden.
"I had more money in my pocket four years ago [under Trump]," Mr. Geltmacher added. "If you're going to tax the [expletive] out of [corporations and wealthy Americans], they're going to pull money out of the market and the market will crash."
Philip Harada, a 37-year-old Lancaster resident decked out in "Make America Great Again" gear, said before Trump's town hall earlier this month that he believed if Ms. Harris is elected, the country would go to "hell in a handbasket."
Mr. Harada, who said he was disabled and a recovering alcoholic, is working at a McDonald's in the area to help to make ends meet. He appreciated Trump's visit to the fast-food chain near Philadelphia last weekend, and said Trump's policies would make him better off in the long run.
'This is the center'
Surrounded by piles of Harris-Walz campaign signs and barcode-laden flyers on volunteer training, Adrienne Wong points to a map at the Union County Democratic Committee's headquarters in the heart of Lewisburg, showing a massive 10-county swath across central and northeastern Pennsylvania.
A Post-It note on the bottom right corner of the map highlights the goal volunteers like Ms. Wong are aiming for: 34,873 doors in largely rural communities must be knocked on as Election Day looms. Above the back room doorway where Ms. Wong stands is a makeshift version of the iconic locker room sign from the Apple TV+ show "Ted Lasso" - a yellow poster with blue tape at the corners, reading simply, "BELIEVE."
"This is the center," Ms. Wong, 39, said before a college student walked in offering to help canvas or make calls. "We have a strong, active volunteer hub here."
Shifts in Pennsylvania's electorate in the Trump era have often made headlines - with many longtime Republican suburban regions abandoning the GOP just as once-Democratic blue-collar communities have leaned red.
But 71-year-old retired veteran Dennis MacAdam, another Union County Democratic volunteer, told the Post-Gazette that Pennsylvania hasn't changed all that much.
"In the middle … it's been conservative the whole time," he said, compared to swing areas surrounding strong Democratic footholds in Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, State College and the Scranton area.
Turnout, he added, is the name of the game in presidential election cycles.
"We recognize that in Union County, we're not going to win the county," he said. "But we want to get as many Democrats as are registered out to vote so that we run up the totals statewide."
Mr. MacAdam and Ms. Wong said enthusiasm among Democratic-leaning voters and volunteers has surged since Mr. Biden dropped out of the race and Ms. Harris became the nominee.
The Union County Democrats said the county was the only red county in Pennsylvania to register more Democrats than Republicans (by a margin of 11) between August and late September.
But it appears Republicans have caught up: Registrations in the county from July 29 through last week totaled 584 Republicans and 545 Democrats. GOP registrations still nearly double Democrats in the county, 14,571 to 8,166 as of the Monday deadline to register; four years ago Trump beat Mr. Biden, 61% to 37%, 12,356 votes to 7,475.
"Democrats have made some inroads in counties like Cumberland, Lancaster and York over the last decade," said Vince Galko, a Republican strategist based in northeastern Pennsylvania.
He said the dynamic has less to do with Democrats' grassroots efforts than with shifting demographics, as more Democrats, ironically, flee Democratic-led cities like Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington to Pennsylvania counties "for a better quality of life," a migration also happening in entire states such as California.
Meanwhile, rural Pennsylvania's colleges "with students from a current generation that believes in big government" are registering to vote in the counties where they attend school, said Mr. Galko. "It's a real problem and the GOP is taking it seriously," he said, citing new voter registration drives and ramped-up grassroots efforts.
'Big people'
The fight over the Keystone State's rural voters is a key reason Ms. Harris tapped Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, and Trump picked Sen. JD Vance, of Ohio, as running mates. Ms. Harris and Mr. Walz, who spent his younger years working on a family farm in Nebraska, have consistently emphasized their working-class roots and status as gun owners as they crisscross Pennsylvania.
Mr. Walz made his first solo campaign stop in Lancaster County in September, and earlier this month he campaigned in York. The Democrats' visits in bellwether regions have consistently focused on outreach to Pennsylvania Republicans, moderates and rural voters, though the campaign has stopped in Western Pennsylvania much more than the central or northeastern parts of the state. Sixteen of the Harris campaign's 50 Pennsylvania offices are in rural counties Trump won in 2020, the New York Times reported.
Trump and Mr. Vance have also barnstormed the state, including a rally-style town hall in Lancaster County last Sunday. Mr. Vance was at a town hall in Harrisburg, the largest urban area near several counties Democrats are targeting, on Saturday, while Trump held a rally Saturday at State College.
Trump joined workers behind a McDonald's counter near Philadelphia last Sunday before his Lancaster town hall. "To me, they're big people," he told moderator Sage Steele when she thanked him for "taking time with the little people."
Trump promised to protect Social Security and Medicare, eliminate taxes on tips and Social Security, lower interest rates to help young people buy a home, and secure the border to help reduce crime and "make our economy great."
The divide in the consistently tight race is on full display not far from grain silos in Middlesex Township in Cumberland County, where Interstate 81 cuts through acre after acre of farmland. On the southbound side, an electronic billboard flashes between an ad stating Trump is "bringing America together!" and "endorsed by [Ultimate Fighting Championship CEO] Dana White," and an ad featuring a GOP voter who says he "won't vote for Trump." The northbound side features a black billboard emblazoned with "Character Matters: Vote Harris Walz."
But persistent advertising in the heated presidential and congressional races - on TV, radio and online - sparked perhaps the only major point of agreement among voters interviewed across the region.
"It's just a pissing match," Johnny Reisinger, a 29-year-old diesel mechanic paging through "Good Vibes, Good Life" by Vex King at the North Hanover Grille in Carlisle, told the Post-Gazette. "Clearly I'm trying to find peace, and [politics] is not the place to find it. They should talk about themselves and what they could do to make a difference ... not bash each other."
John Messick, a Trump supporter stopping by T.J. Rockwell's in Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, last week, said he was recently doing dishes when his 6-year-old turned up behind him and, "completely unprovoked," asked him whether he was aware "Bob Casey is not doing his job in Philadelphia" - echoing the voiceover of a campaign ad.
"Don't tell me about how the other person sucks," he said, describing the ads as pervasive. "Tell me what you're going to do."
Several voters on both sides also said they distrusted campaign ads because of the rise of artificial intelligence.
Traci Klinger, a Lancaster County resident who works in higher education but has a background in video production, said content can be "spliced any way you want to create any storyline you want." A Trump supporter, Ms. Klinger acknowledged that campaigning for both Democrats and Republicans had "stooped so low" over the last several decades.
J.J. Balaban, a Democratic strategist and ad-maker based in Philadelphia, said the term "negative" advertising is in the "eye of the beholder," as on abortion or other topics, "it may be seen as providing differences between the candidates on an issue a lot of voters care about."
"A lot of people say they don't like negative ads, but the reason they are so prevalent is that they can be very effective," he said. "Many of the ads are meant to influence a small swath of undecided voters."
Norman Kauffman, the farm market manager at the century-old Kauffman Orchards in Bird-in-Hand in Lancaster County, said no ads or arguments had a prayer of getting him to the polls this year. A member of the region's Mennonite community, he won't be voting despite the occasional text from friends encouraging him to exercise his civic right.
There is also an "Amish for Trump" push in the region, but as Harrisburg-based Republican consultant Christopher Nicholas noted in a recent newsletter, "most Amish do not participate in elections."
"We know about [the political races] and are even concerned, but we think that praying about it and praying for our government officials is better than voting," Mr. Kauffman, 67, said in a bustling aisle of his market. "We appreciate so much living in the land of freedom. We've been here for a couple hundred years, and we're confident and hopeful that can continue."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Trump voters who arrived too late to sit within direct sight of the former president at a Lancaster town hall on Oct. 20 watched on a jumbo screen. Lancaster is among three rural counties that voted overwhelmingly for Trump in 2020.
PHOTO: Ben Kail/Post-Gazette: One of many farms dotting the landscape of Lancaster County, one of several Republican stronghold counties that Democrats are hoping not to win, but to narrow Trump's margin of victory in the hopes of running up Vice President Kamala Harris' statewide totals.
PHOTO: Ben Kail/Post-Gazette: Trump-Vance signs dominate many roadsides along cornfields, dairy farms and small neighborhoods in rural Central Pennsylvania, where Democrats are trying to narrow a longstanding gap with Republicans.
PHOTO: Benjamin Kail/Post-Gazette photos: Thousands of Donald Trump supporters gathered at the Lancaster County Convention Center on Oct. 20, a day that also saw Trump appear at the fry station and drive-thru of a Philadelphia-area McDonald's and in Pittsburgh for the Steelers game on "Sunday Night Football."