TITLE: IT'S DECISION TIME; PA. LOOMS LARGE IN ROAD TO VICTORY FOR HARRIS, TRUMP
TOPIC: Military
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-11-03 00:00:00
SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. A-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX

BODY:
A former president and major-party nominee convicted of 34 felonies for the first time in U.S. history. The oldest-ever sitting president abandoning his re-election bid with just over 100 days left in the race. An assassination attempt. The first woman of color to lead a national ticket. An unprecedented warning from former generals that the Republican candidate poses a dire threat to the country.
Central to it all: the state where the American experiment began.
An election year unlike any other is just days from culminating in a vote that will shape the country for a generation or more, and nowhere are the ballots more crucial than Pennsylvania.
In the largest of the seven battleground states in the presidential election, Pa. voters will decide one of the tightest Senate races in the country, toss-up U.S. House races that could tip the balance of power in Congress, and control of a closely divided state Legislature that will hold sway over the remainder of Gov. Josh Shapiro's term.
Rising tensions over the stakes in the election have led to increased security at once-obscure government centers where votes will be tallied, and have prompted public safety officials - including Pittsburgh's - to prepare to mobilize their ranks of officers.
Election officials have begun holding daily briefings, and armies of lawyers are already clashing in what's expected to be a string of high-stakes legal battles that could stretch far beyond Election Day on Tuesday and leave the presidential race unsettled for weeks.
Ad spending tops $1 billion
More than 1.7 million ballots have been cast, with millions more to come in a state that has for months been the focus of unrelenting attention by some of the most powerful figures in American life.
Well over $1 billion worth of ads have inundated Pennsylvania's airwaves - more than any state has ever seen in one election cycle. The candidates for president and vice president have logged dozens more visits here than anywhere else in the country. Thousands of volunteers have fanned out in massive door-knocking operations meant to push every possible supporter to cast their vote in elections that are expected to be decided by razor-thin margins.
"The direction of American history might depend on 50,000 people in Pennsylvania," said Lauren Cristella, president of the good-government group Committee of Seventy. "I hope that Pennsylvanians truly appreciate the enormous weight of their particular decisions in this cycle."
That outsized influence starts at the top of the ticket, where the presidential campaigns and their deep-pocketed supporters have struggled to gain an edge in a race that's one of the most closely divided in recent history - and that offers one of the starkest choices the country has ever faced, political experts say.
On issues from the war in Ukraine to reproductive rights to immigration and the economy, Vice President Kamala Harris, 60, and former President Donald Trump, 78, promise fundamentally different approaches.
Trump has slammed the vice president as soft on immigration and promised to institute the largest mass deportation in U.S. history, including building detention camps and deploying the military to round up people who are in the country illegally.
In their only debate, Ms. Harris blamed the former president for sinking a bipartisan immigration bill that would have scaled up funding and enforcement at the border. Because of Trump's opposition, Senate Republicans voted against the bill they had negotiated and sponsored.
On abortion rights, Trump boasted about appointing the U.S. Supreme Court justices that overturned Roe v. Wade - a decades-old conservative goal - while Ms. Harris promised to sign legislation reinstating abortion rights nationally.
But even as the candidates drove home their policy messages in the final weeks, the campaign has been roiled by events that, in a more traditional election, would have defined the race.
In mid-October, The Washington Post revealed that retired Gen. Mark Milley, the most senior member of the military during Trump's last two years in office, called the former president "fascist to the core." Just over a week later, Trump's longest-serving chief of staff, retired Marine Corps. Gen. John Kelly, agreed and said Trump had made admiring statements about Adolf Hitler.
The ex-generals' decisions to weigh in on the race - particularly in its critical final weeks - is almost unheard of in a military culture that drills into its members the need for the institution to remain loyal to the Constitution and outside the political fray.
Garbage in, garbage out
Then, in a major rally at Madison Square Garden that was supposed to showcase the Trump campaign's closing message, one of the speakers called Puerto Rico a "floating island of garbage," personally enraging many people of Puerto Rican descent both in the territory and the states and giving the Harris campaign a new line of attack in the closing days of the race.
Just days later, Mr. Biden sparked backlash among conservatives when he said during a virtual event that "the only garbage I see out there is his supporter's."
Ms. Harris quickly distanced herself from the comment. Trump has tried to do the same with the remarks at his rally, while his running mate, Ohio U.S. Sen. J.D. Vance said people need to "stop getting so offended at every little thing."
"What happened in Madison Square Garden was a major unforced error," Democratic consultant Modia Butler said. "The more he offends and disparages those groups, it gets them off the fence and closer to Kamala Harris."
Pennsylvania alone is home to more than 470,000 Puerto Ricans, more than 315,000 of whom are of voting age, according to the census.
But it's unclear whether the outrage - which once could have ended a politician's career - will meaningfully affect the election. A series of unprecedented events has rocked the campaign since the summer, but still barely moved Pennsylvania's electorate, which polls show has been evenly divided for months.
On July 13, a gunman took aim at Trump during a rally in Butler County, killing one man and wounding three others, including the candidate. Polling averages that day showed him with 44% of the vote in Pennsylvania. A week later, he'd only risen one percentage point - well within the margin of error.
On July 21, Mr. Biden dropped out of the race and endorsed Ms. Harris, who would go on to secure the party's nomination despite never having won a primary. In the earliest polling averages, she and Trump were about 0.5% apart in the state.
Months later - after two party conventions, a Democratic vice-presidential search that focused on Pennsylvania's popular governor and a widely watched debate in which Trump falsely accused Haitian immigrants of eating pets in Ohio - they're 0.1% apart.
With margins so thin, both campaigns have struggled to hold together parts of their political bases they have long relied on. For Republicans, it's been moderate voters repulsed by the Jan. 6 insurrection and turned off by the bellicose style of Trump, the first president to be impeached twice and indicted four times.
A near-even divide
For Democrats, the Biden administration's support for Israel's war in Gaza and Lebanon despite tens of thousands of civilian casualties has threatened support for Ms. Harris among some blocs of Arab and Muslim Americans - a key constituency in Michigan, another presidential battleground.
In most states, changes in support on the margins of a party's coalition aren't critical because the concentration of either conservatives or liberals give one party an overwhelming advantage.
What sets Pennsylvania apart - and the reason the state has been the focus of some of the most intense, expensive campaigning ever seen - is that the vast swaths of rural areas populated by conservatives are balanced out by liberal urban areas more evenly than almost any other state.
"It is a microcosm of the split in America. You have a very urban, diverse Philadelphia; you have an urban but working-class Pittsburgh; and you have rural America," said Matthew Foster, a political science professor at American University.
The state's near-even divide has led to fierce battles not just for the presidency, but for Democrat Bob Casey Jr.'s U.S. Senate seat, where his tight race against Republican David McCormick has exploded into the most expensive legislative race in the state's history.
Further down the ballot, Republicans in the state Senate are trying to hold on to a majority of just six seats, the slimmest margin in a decade. In the state House, where all 203 seats are on the ballot, it's even closer: Democrats control the chamber by one vote.
In such a closely divided state with 19 electoral votes, the stakes for the two parties are higher than anywhere else in the country, and the campaigns are mobilizing for a fight they expect to extend long past when voting ends at 8 p.m. Tuesday.
State law forbids local election offices from even beginning to tally mail-in ballots until 7 a.m. on Election Day, making it likely that the results of many races won't be known for days, officials said.
"Predicting exactly when Pennsylvania will have unofficial results that show a clear winner is just not possible and never has been," Secretary of State Al Schmidt said on Thursday. "Ultimately, it comes down to - and has always ever come down to - is how close a race is. The closer the race, the longer it takes to know who won and who lost."
That gap - after the voting ends but before a clear winner emerges - presents a danger seldom seen in American history.
A fear of violence
U.S. intelligence agencies, state leaders and county election workers worry that a flood of misinformation, disinformation and conspiracy theories could spread unfounded doubts in the integrity of the election - and possibly even spur violence.
Four years ago, those claims culminated in a deadly insurrection as Trump supporters stormed the U.S. Capitol in a violent assault fueled by lies about a stolen election.
For weeks leading up to the attack, Trump and his supporters - including elected officials in Pennsylvania - spread false claims of widespread fraud that convinced millions of people that Trump had really won.
Overseas adversaries watched in 2020 as pervasive lies grew into unrest - and they learned from it, U.S. intelligence officials said.
This time, foreign adversaries are poised to jump into the post-election fray, using social media and other channels to amplify false claims about the election's security, stoke doubts about the validity of the vote and pit Americans against each other, intelligence agencies said in a series of stark warnings last month.
A declassified report from the National Intelligence Council warned that China, Iran and Russia "are now better prepared to exploit opportunities after polls close" than they were four years ago.
"They probably will be quick to create false narratives or amplify content they think will create confusion and friction about the electoral process," the agencies concluded.
Pennsylvania is already in their sights.
Just over a week ago, a widely shared video showed ballots being destroyed in Bucks County, just outside of Philadelphia.
It was fake - and according to federal authorities, the people who faked it were Russian actors taking part in "Moscow's broader effort to raise unfounded questions about the integrity of the U.S. election."
Election deniers
Trump has again refused to commit to accepting the results of the election or commit to a peaceful transfer of power if he loses. Millions of his supporters still believe debunked conspiracy theories about widespread fraud in the electoral system and are hunting for evidence to justify their doubts.
"People are entrenched," said Ms. Cristella, of the Committee of Seventy.
Across the country, election deniers have won offices that are charged with certifying the results - something that for centuries has been a routine task but that now can draw crowds of protesters, or worse.
In 2020, Mr. Schmidt was a Republican commissioner in Philadelphia charged with overseeing the city's election. When he refuted Trump's claims about supposed irregularities there, the then-president singled him out to his supporters, some of whom threatened his life and his family.
Last week, as Mr. Schmidt warned about the threat of "rampant" misinformation in the election's immediate aftermath, he tried to head off similar threats against other election workers this year.
"I want to remind you that the people doing the hard work of administering this election are your neighbors at your polling place and the professional civil servants at the county level who are truly making democracy work," Mr. Schmidt said.
Even as Trump and his surrogates have begun laying the groundwork to cast doubt on Tuesday's election in Pennsylvania, teams of lawyers on both sides are preparing for dozens of legal challenges across the most closely divided battleground states.
Super PACs and other groups that have fueled a historically expensive election have kept reserves of cash to fight the legal and public relations battles that are expected to play out after the polls close, said Mr. Foster, of American University.
"A lot of organizations are saving money because they anticipate they'll need to make an advertising push, they'll need to make a legal push," Mr. Foster said.
With a Republican base primed to believe that the only way Democrats can win is through cheating - and some even expecting a blowout win for Trump despite polls showing a dead heat - a Harris victory or near-victory could kick off a fierce battle for public opinion alongside the pitched legal fights in courtrooms, he said.
"It's going to get really ugly," Mr. Foster said. "And Pennsylvania could be the epicenter of that."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Gene J. Puskar/Associated Press: An election year unlike any other is coming to a close, and nowhere in America will the results be more important than Pennsylvania, the largest of the battleground states and site of some of the most dramatic moments of the campaign season.
PHOTO: James Hilston/Post-Gazette: Sunday A1 Election Photo-illustration
PHOTO: Gene J. Puskar/Associated Press: Republican presidential candidate and former President Donald Trump is surrounded by U.S. Secret Service agents as he is helped off the stage after an assassination attempt at a campaign rally in Butler on July 13.
PHOTO: Anna Moneymaker/Getty Images: President Joe Biden dropped out of the race July 21, endorsing Vice President Kamala Harris.
PHOTO: Jacquelyn Martin/Associated Press: Ms. Harris speaks at a campaign event at Carnegie Mellon University on Sept. 25.
PHOTO: Jabin Botsford/The Washington Post: Former President Donald Trump returns to Butler County for a campaign event Oct. 5. On the same stage on July 13, a sniper's bullet nicked the GOP presidential nominee in the ear. The sniper was shot and killed.