TITLE: DONALD TRUMP IS NOT A FASCIST
TOPIC: Military
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-11-15 00:00:00
SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A-17
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX

BODY:
For months, Democratic Party leaders, mainstream media figures, and renowned scholars have told us that Donald Trump is a fascist - a new Hitler eager to destroy our democracy. Now, despite all the warnings, Trump has decisively won the popular and Electoral College votes.
What does his victory say about America? Does it mean that Americans are fascists? Or racists, misogynists, transphobes, or stupid? Should Democrats now engage in protracted "social mobilization" like that which toppled "electoral authoritarians" in the color revolutions of eastern Europe, as some have suggested?
An unwise comparison
It is of course difficult to know what motivated most voters. But the failure of the widely hyped fascism narrative suggests that casually comparing Trump and his voters to the world's greatest evils was not wise. Only partisan Democrats and never-Trump Republicans believed it. Most Americans, including Trump voters and nonvoters, apparently did not.
People turned instead to their experiences of the Trump presidency. Sure, he broke vaguely defined norms or newly designated "guardrails" and sometimes spoke cruelly. But new ways of doing things are not in themselves unlawful, nor crude words dangerous.
Yes, Trump still disputes the 2020 election. But despite January 6, he gave up power - something a real autocrat would not do.
Unlike trademark fascists, Trump did not start new wars. He has talked frequently about bringing peace to Ukraine.
Kamala Harris on the other hand embraced the Cheneys and hundreds of former national security operatives associated with aggression, torture, and surveillance. Trump's response - denouncing Liz Cheney as a warmonger and chicken hawk - resonated with many outside the Beltway.
Trump is no foreign policy dove, as his views on Iran, Gaza and Venezuela make clear. But unlike fascists of old and neo-conservatives today, his presidency was marked by less waste of American lives and money in overseas follies than most administrations.
Trump condemned Harris harshly, and he often speaks loosely. (He is also frequently misquoted.) But politicians have never shied away from tough language in close elections.
The real problem is that many who cried "fascist" have endorsed censorship of ideas they unilaterally term "hate" or "disinformation." According to four federal judges, the Biden administration "orchestrated" a "coordinated" campaign "arguably involving the most massive attack against free speech in United States' history" to promote controversial covid policies.
Government pressure contributed to social media companies barring ordinary Americans from posting true stories about vaccine injuries or sharing minority views on other issues.
Questionable charges
In the weeks before the election, Democratic Party leaders rebuked Blacks and Hispanics, especially men, for not backing Harris sufficiently. Yet treating people as racial or gender categories, not individuals, is illiberal. This is likely why the scoldings failed. Trump appealed to and won people of all backgrounds.
Trump's criticisms of journalists do not make him a fascist either, even if some of his First Amendment views are troubling. The criticisms rang true to many Americans because of the mainstream media's obvious biases, revealed again by the White House press ignoring Biden's decline. When his debate performance made denial impossible, the debacle underscored the media's own decay into partisanship.
The incident also highlighted hypocrisy in the "threat to democracy" charges. Democratic Party elites summarily replaced Biden with Harris. They drowned out calls for a snap primary with demands for party unity and vacuous "joy" talk.
Trump has said he will fire career civil servants and prosecute opponents. But America's bloated federal bureaucracy is part of the Executive branch, giving Presidents wide discretion to choose officials in voters' names. Prosecutions?
If so, Democrats should blame themselves. They set the precedent, going after Trump and associates using novel and tortured legal theories. America's electoral "jury" has now found him "not guilty" on all counts.
Most important, questionable fascism charges paled before economic issues made worse by Democratic Party policies that hurt blue-collar voters. College-loan forgiveness not only smacked of election pandering. It took tax money from the working class and gave it to people with high incomes and good prospects.
Lax border controls drew millions of migrants to compete against low-wage Americans already suffering from open trade. Climate policies raised energy prices today for hypothetical benefits against an uncertain threat sometime in the future. If indifference toward the less privileged is a mark of fascism, these policies are problematic.
No apocalypse
For those who warned that democracy would die under Trump, the apocalypse is now. The American people, including large numbers of women and minorities, have shown they don't believe it. Republican control of the Senate and the House mean that major policy shifts will come soon.
No doubt Democrats will not like them. But the demise of pet policies and calcified norms is not fascism. It is democracy. As Democrats fight back, they must shift from fearmongering to reasoned argument. As they rebuild their shattered party, they need to rethink their attacks on the Americans who once formed its backbone and remain integral to our society.
Clifford Bob is a professor and chair of the political science department at Duquesne University. He is finishing a book titled "The Fear Industrial Complex." The views expressed do not represent those of Duquesne University.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Sebastian Foltz/Post-Gazette: The Republican Voters Against Trump bus passes through the Strip District on Oct. 18.