TITLE: Letters to the Editor
TOPIC: Military
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-10-09 00:00:00
SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A12
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Election', 'Military', 'Crime']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
Vance dance
It was painful to watch Sen. JD Vance dance around Gov. Tim Walz's question during their debate: Did Donald Trump lose the 2020 election? Yes is the fact-based answer and should have been an easy response. In the 2020 election, Joe Biden won 306 electoral votes, Trump 232. In the popular vote, more than 81 million Americans supported Biden (the most votes cast for any candidate in U.S. history), while 74 million voted for Trump. These are large differences relative to prior elections. The facts are clear. Biden won. Trump lost. Despite the obvious outcome, the Trump campaign challenged the election results in every state and federal court available to him, including the U.S. Supreme Court. No judge - even the Trump appointees - changed a single vote or accepted the election challenges as credible. If Vance cannot accept these facts and simply answer yes, he is not credible as our vice president, and certainly not to be a heartbeat away from the presidency.
           Fred Walker, Wyndmoor
. . .
When I saw JD Vance's smug claim during the vice presidential debate that there was a "peaceful transfer of power" after the 2020 election, I thought, if there was a transfer of power, then somebody lost, right? I remembered that Donald Trump didn't attend the actual transfer of power when Joe Biden was sworn in. (Which, using one of the GOP's favorite words, could be called unprecedented.) There's also the fact that while the peaceful transfer of power was happening, Trump was leaving the White House with boxes full of classified documents that didn't belong to him.
           Mike Clark, Downingtown
Lesser choice
Responding to a reporter asking which U.S. presidential candidate a conscientious voter should choose, Pope Francis said both were lacking in life issues, so one should vote for the lesser of two evils. I chose Kamala Harris. I am a semiretired priest of the Diocese of Camden and have been the writer of a social justice column for the diocesan newspaper for over 40 years. Now that the Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization decision nullified Roe v. Wade, I have little incentive to vote for the party that chooses as its leader a mortally flawed insurrectionist rejected by his own vice president and hundreds of other high-level administration subordinates, both civilian and military. In fact, I go so far as to say that the party itself deserves to be exorcized from federal and state legislatures by voters because of its blind, unending allegiance to a leader who would overthrow the Constitution and democracy in order to avoid imprisonment.
           The Rev. Robert J. Gregorio, Glassboro
Making history
The Phillies are now 2024 National League East champions. For America's oldest, continuous sports franchise, these types of celebrations have been few and far between, but some history may help point to a truly Red October this season. It's been 92 years since legendary Yankees hitter Babe Ruth - just out of the hospital from appendicitis and overweight - stepped to the plate in Wrigley Field. Down 0-2 in the count with the Chicago fans and Cubs bench mercilessly taunting him, Ruth pointed to center field where an American flag was blowing in the wind. On Charlie Root's next pitch, Ruth would blast a home run some 490 feet. Only two players in MLB history have 15 home runs in fewer than 50 postseason games: Ruth and Bryce Harper.
Forty-five years ago, Pete Rose left the Cincinnati Reds for the Phillies and a $3.24 million contract. The result was a 1980 World Series Championship, the first for the Phillies franchise. Fifteen years ago, after winning the World Series just the year before, the 2009 Phillies won the National League pennant over the Los Angeles Dodgers and advanced to the fall classic once again. If the Phillies' great history of milestone anniversaries continues, it will be a great Red October. Let's hope so.
           Michael Thomas Leibrandt,Abington Township
Right direction
I am thrilled to see that Carmel Morina is running to serve as Gloucester County sheriff. Residents deserve a sheriff who actually has law enforcement experience. Morina worked his way up the ranks, from a patrolman to chief of police to sheriff. He has served honorably every time and has always put the residents of Gloucester County first. I know that if he's elected again, he will work with local police to keep our community safe and will make Gloucester County proud.
           Vicki Antonini, Gibbstown
Tax truth
In claiming a shift to the right among working-class voters in Philadelphia, The Inquirer quoted a Kensington worker who stated that taxes were lower under Donald Trump. That is just false. Federal income tax rates for individuals and corporations have, in fact, not changed since the tax cut legislation signed by Trump early in his administration. This worker is just ignorant and a shill for Trump, as evident by his claim that "the people actually love him." Half of the electorate cannot stand Trump, and many others are deeply troubled by him even if some also have concerns about voting for Kamala Harris.
Citing this worker's claim about taxes without flagging that it is false allows it to ring as though true. It also falsely characterizes working-class Philadelphians. This is a disservice to readers who need a dispassionate account of what's at stake economically in this election and for whom. Tax policy is going to be hotly debated in 2025 regardless of who wins. Trump is going to continue pursuing policies that disproportionately favor the wealthy. Harris has pledged that individual rates will not rise except for those with incomes over $400,000. As reporters interview prospective voters, please keep that in mind.
           D. Kent Peterman, Philadelphia
In charge
I would like to be the first to ask President Joe Biden to give us a real October surprise and please resign. Put Kamala Harris in charge of corralling Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his government's indiscriminate killing of Palestinians in Gaza. Obviously, Biden has no intention of using the massive leverage he has. Stop using my tax money to arm the man who has zero interest in peace. Let us see right now how Harris will handle the real-life pressure of the presidency with people's lives in the balance as Netanyahu looks for the final Hamas terrorist by blowing up hospitals with bombs supplied by the U.S. It is appalling.
           Roy Lehman,Woolwich Township
Disqualifying factor
In 2020, Stacy Garrity won her election to the office of state treasurer, yet denied that it was a fair and honest contest because Donald Trump did not win. She spoke with Doug Mastriano at the state Capitol on Jan. 5, 2021, where she claimed that the voting process in Pennsylvania was "fully violated" and "the election from this November is tarnished forever." She said these things after dozens of court challenges had established that there was no proof the election was tainted. In my mind, this disqualifies Garrity. To cast doubt on our election system, which is the very core of our democracy, is a mortal sin. Any politician who refuses to accept that Trump lost the election should be barred from ever running for elected office again. Garrity is unfit for office. She put Trump above our country.
           Michael Walsh, Elkins Park