TITLE: WHAT I VOTED FOR (AND AGAINST)
TOPIC: Military
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-11-06 00:00:00
SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A-16
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Union', 'Election', 'Military']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
I voted today, in a presidential election, on Nov. 5, 2024, and I noted the time, too, and I looked hard at the earnest faces of fellow citizens working the polling place.
I was consciously preserving details that usually require no absorption at all, I think because this one felt different.
I voted for democracy
I voted for American democracy, with all its shaggy faults and myriad imperfections.
I voted for the Constitution of the United States, even the parts that two plus centuries have twisted into intractable social irritants.
I voted for the notion that the government should have your back, not your uterus.
I voted for sanity.
I voted for civility.
I voted to defeat fascism and to honor the memory of the men and women everywhere who gave their lives to do the very same thing 70 years ago.
I voted for the peaceful transfer of power, the highest American ideal derived from the most basic competitive ground rule, which makes this the greatest democracy in this history of the civilized world.
I voted for cleaner air, cleaner water, and for a clean break from the certain doom of climate denialism.
I voted for compassion over fear, empathy over ignorance, humanity over mockery, hope over nihilism, progress over regress, and decency over vulgarity.
I voted for spelling. I like presidents who can spell.
I voted for the candidate who might actually mind if I got shot trying to commit journalism.
I voted to keep fluoride in the water, a sentence no one should have to type in 2024.
I voted for working class people and for anyone who supports their survival in the face of insatiable creeping oligarchy.
I voted to put my mark on the right side of history, and for history itself, in its most honest possible rendition, not whitewashed, sanewashed, rewritten, or edited with a cleaver to make people comfortable.
I voted for enlightenment, for education, for science, for expertise, for art, for music, and for the promise that every American has the same chance at making any or all of those things improve their lives and energize their dreams.
I voted for the candidate who is not a friend to America's enemies and not an enemy to America's friends.
For justice
I voted for the candidate who doesn't have "sentencing, 34 felony counts," on their personal calendar for November.
I voted for the idea that the maybe the federal minimum wage shouldn't be the same $7.25 it's been since 2009, when median CEO packages began their climb toward today's $16.3 million.
I voted for an America where pregnancy complications are again just that, complications, not a potential death sentence.
I voted for an America that can find it in itself to let doctors be doctors again rather than threaten them with prison for delivering life-saving reproductive care (lookin' at you Texas).
I voted for the candidate I'm pretty sure won't throw away the pandemic preparedness plan.
I voted for a country that doesn't need sniper drones and razor wire to protect election workers.
I voted for the reinforcement, reclamation, and prudent expansion of rights, mine and yours, voting rights, reproductive rights, First Amendment rights, Miranda rights, privacy rights, religious rights, due process rights, LGBTQ rights, and the right to make a right on red where not marked otherwise.
I voted for the somehow antiquated idea that America's 8-year-olds needn't endure active shooter drills so that politicians can pose with their assault rifles around the Christmas tree.
I voted for the expansion of health care, for paid family and medical leave and for home care services through Medicare, instead of just turning over the whole system over to a vaccine denier/conspiracy theorist who claims a brain worm has eaten part of his. This wasn't hard.
I voted for serious people to perform serious government business regarding complex local, state, and national issues, perilous international relations, urgent global crises, and unforeseen emergencies, rather than for unserious people whose only ambition is serious damage.
I voted to stand with General Mark Milley, General John Kelly, former Secretary of Defense Mark Esper, and the hundreds of military leaders, historians, legal scholars, and geopolitical observers who've identified the imminent danger of American autocracy.
I voted for the kind of immigration reform that has eluded too many presidential administrations, an equitable bi-partisan solution written into law with language that inspires citizenship and excludes terms like mass deportation, mass incarceration, poison, vermin, animals, garbage, etc. Wasn't hard.
For the law
I voted for the principle, strained as never before in this country by the presidential campaign that just ended, that no one is above the law.
I voted on the general premise articulated by Theodore Roosevelt more than a century ago: "This country will not be a permanently good place for any of us to live in unless we make it a reasonably good place for all of us to live in."
I voted for the one candidate for president whose full intention is that I was not voting for the last time.
Because I'd like to see those faces again. God bless them.
Gene Collier is a columnist for the Post-Gazette: gcollier@post-gazette.com and on X: @genecollier.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Jacquelyn Martin/Associated Press: Kamala Harris at her campaign rally in Erie on Oct. 14.