A woman leaves a polling station for the EU referendum at Batley Town Hall in west Yorkshire, England, on Thursday in the constituency of murdered Labour MP Jo Cox. DANNY LAWSON / PA
LONDON - Officials throughout Britain worked into this morning counting tens of millions of ballots that will determine whether the country will leave the European Union, after a fierce debate over trade, immigration and sovereignty that is unlikely to end no matter the outcome.
The financial markets, and officials from Washington to Brussels to Frankfurt, were monitoring the outcome cautiously.
The pound surged against the dollar over the past week astradersanticipatedthatvoters would choose the status quo, and British bookmakers have done a brisk business taking bets.
Late Thursday night, the pound rose further after the polling organization YouGov released a final day-of-election poll showing the Remain camp ahead, 52 percent to 48 percent.
Nigel Farage, the leader of the UK Independence Party, also made remarks suggesting he was not confident his side would win.
But this morning, the pound suddenly slid after resultscameinfromtwoareas of northeast England: Leave did better than expected in the working-class community of Sunderland, and the Remain camp won Newcastle-upon-Tyne, a university city where it was expected to perform strongly, by only a thin margin.
Voting lasted from 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. Thursday, though some poll sites stayed open longer to accommodate voters who had gotten in line to cast their ballots.
Two other last-minute opinion surveys also gave the Remain camp an edge, but given the failure of most British pollsters to foresee the Conservative Party's victory in last year's general elections, many analysts were putting little trust in surveys.
"Neither a comfortable Remain victory nor a comfortable Leave victory can be ruledout,"StephenFisher,an elections expert who teaches at Oxford, wrote after noting that polling averages gave Remain a very slight lead.
H a l f o f v o t e r s w e r e thought to have walked to the polls, though many others drove and a few rode horses. Strong rains in parts of the capital and southeast England complicated voting; floods forced the borough of Kingston upon Thames in southwest London to move two polling sites.
By the Thursday evening rush, rains had caused delays brought foot traffic at Waterloo to a standstill.
Until the polls closed, news organizations were prohibited from reporting accounts of how people voted, but in interviews, Britons expressed their concerns and anxieties in more general terms.
In the deprived town of Oldham, near Manchester, a traditional stronghold of the Labour Party, Lisa Kirk, 43, said she and her family had been swayed by the UK Independence Party, which opposes Britain's membership in the European Union, and expressed disenchantment with British leaders. "They're just letting all the foreigners in, and there is nothing left in the system for us," she said.