The eye-popping success of the Labor Party in Thursday's British elections is the paradoxical conclusion to a campaign that two veteran Minnesota observers of international politics rated as eye-glazingly dull, at least in its substance.
 Prof. emeritus John Turner of the University of Minnesota, who has observed almost every British campaign since 1945, called this one "the dullest I've ever witnessed in London."
 Turner's traveling companion and university colleague, political scientist Robert Holt, said the campaign appeared to be "a contest between two parties over which could best administer Tory [Conservative] policies."
 But Holt emphasized that Labor's campaign was technically brilliant, if ideologically tepid. "Watching someone sell soap, but sell it brilliantly - is that boring or interesting?" Holt asked. In either case, the results were anything but dull. "When you have to go back to 1832 to find a Tory rout this bad - that's big," Holt said.
The two Minnesota dons watched the last two weeks of the campaign in London and called in their reactions Thursday night after attending a party celebrating Labor's sweep, the biggest mandate the party has received in its century-long history.
 Turner said he went to the party last night clutching a list of 22 marginal seats that the Tories had to carry if they were to have a chance. Labor carried every single one. And Holt said that the possible doubling of the parliamentary representation of the third-party Liberal Democrats had the potential to alter the national debate significantly.
 But he seemed almost as impressed with what Labor leader Tony Blair had done within his party as with how the party fared Thursday with the electorate.
 Although Blair is often compared to Bill Clinton because both men dragged their parties from the left wing of national politics into the center of the spectrum, "the change in Labor was much more profound than the change in the Democratic Party," Holt said. The Democrats were never a socialist party, but Labor was.
 Under Blair, Labor shed not only the substance of its past - such as a platform plank calling for nationalization of the means of production - but the symbols as well. Red, the international color of socialism, had always been Labor's color, in contrast with Tory blue.
 "Under Blair, suddenly Labor's color is purple," Holt said, "although I'm not too sure if purple is supposed to be the symbol of the monarchy or the color you get when you mix Labor red with Tory blue."
 Holt observed another big reversal in the usual roles of the British parties. The Tories, like the Republicans in recent U.S. elections, have been the party that knew how to close ranks and present a united front.
 But this year, the Tories who have been most skeptical of further British integration into Europe have openly rebelled against Prime Minister John Major's official wait-and-see position. And several Tory members of Parliament who stand accused of ethical transgressions put their hopes for personal political survival ahead of the party's interest.
 Major, who couldn't or wouldn't throw them off the ticket, came across as a weak leader who couldn't control or discipline his troops. Tories from the party's blueblood base never really liked being led by Major, who came from working-class roots and lacks a university education, Holt said. When it began to look as though Major would lead the Tories to defeat anyway, the party regulars began dumping on him.
 "For all these reasons, the Tories just didn't give the appearance of being a party that could govern anymore," Holt said.
 On the other hand, Labor, like the U.S. Democrats, had a reputation for letting intraparty battles hamper them.  But after 18 years out of power, "everyone in Labor seems to have decided to do whatever is necessary to win," Holt said. That meant that even the party traditionalists, who privately must hate Blair's makeover, have refrained from publicly criticizing him or expressing views that deviate from the party's centrist manifesto.
 Turner added that Britons just seemed to be tired of the Tories. "They don't see much fire in Mr. Major. His party has been in power 18 years, and people are just saying that's a bit long."
 Turner also bemoaned the Americanization of British politics. Door-to-door canvassing, which used to be the heart and soul of British electioneering, has almost disappeared, he said. The parties now canvass by telephone, which Turner said misses some voters and gives the parties much less of a feel for what's going on with the electorate.
 Turner and Holt added that they were struck by the pall cast over the campaign by the fear of Irish Republican Army terrorism. You couldn't even attend a public rally to hear the candidates speak without applying to the party headquarters for credentials, they said. In many cases, the location of a supposedly public meeting was not published or broadcast.