British Prime Minister John Major could launch as early as today
an election battle that the opposition Labor Party is overwhelmingly
favored to win.
Britain's economy is thriving, and unemployment is well below
rates in European neighbors like France and Germany. But millions
of Britons accuse the ruling Conservatives of broken promises,
arrogance and being in power too long.
Most British newspapers said Sunday that Major would end months
of speculation by announcing that new elections will be held May
1. The elections must be called by May 22. News reports said Major
would go to Buckingham Palace later today to ask Queen Elizabeth
to formally dissolve Parliament.
The latest opinion polls show the Conservative Party 25 points
behind the Labor Party, which appears poised to win its first
election since 1974. No British party has overturned such a large
opinion poll deficit so close to an election. Labor leader Tony
Blair has transformed Labor's fortunes by moving it toward the
political center from its leftist, pro-working-class heritage.
OZONE WARNING: Russia said it had found two vast holes
in the ozone layer above its territory and warned people in the
affected regions to take precautions against too much exposure
to the sun. Anatoly Yakovlev, of Russia's meteorological office,
said one hole stretched from northwest Russia, including St. Petersburg,
to as far as the Baltic states, Belarus and Ukraine. The other
covered the regions of Yakutsk and Krasnoyarsk in Siberia.
Ozone is an atmospheric gas shielding animals and plants from
ultraviolet radiation. Its molecules are destroyed continuously
by natural compounds. Human activity, such as the use of many
chemicals, speeds its depletion. Russia's Interfax news agency
said analysts had concluded that the two holes were caused naturally.
Yakovlev said the ozone above northwest Russia was 20% to 30%
down from normal, making ultraviolet radiation 40% stronger. The
amount of ozone above the affected regions of Siberia had fallen
about 35%, he said.
EUROPEAN JOBS: Tens of thousands of European labor union
members turned central Brussels, Belgium, into a sea of color
and noise as they vented their anger at rising job losses and
what they called uncaring governments.
French carmaker Renault and Chairman Louis Schweitzer came in
for particularly harsh treatment after the firm's unexpected decision
two weeks ago to close its profitable plant at Vilvoorde, near
Brussels, with the loss of 3,100 jobs.
"Renault is developing turbo-charged unemployment," one banner
read. Schweitzer was hanged in effigy. Vilvoorde workers dumped
a yellow car body in front of the Brussels stock market and stomped
on it.
Unemployment in the 15-nation European Union averages 10.8%. European
governments seem unable to solve the problem, trade union leaders
say.
COLOMBIA SCANDAL: Guillermo Alberto Gonzalez resigned as
Colombia's defense minister, two days after acknowledging he accepted
a $ 7,500 check in 1989 from a leading narcotics figure. The check
was issued by reputed drug trafficker Justo Pastor Perafan, who
is being sought by authorities. Gonzalez acknowledged receiving
the money for his congressional campaign. But he said he did not
know at the time about a drug-money connection.
N. KOREAN DEFECTOR: North Korea's top ideologue, sheltered
in a South Korean diplomatic mission in Beijing, may leave China
today for the Philippines.
South Korean radio said South Korean diplomats had said farewell
to Hwang Jang Yop in preparation for his trip.
The South Korean foreign ministry declined to comment on the report:
"We have decided not to talk about Hwang's whereabouts or the
timing of his departure."
The radio report said Hwang was expected to spend a month in the
Philippines. He would then fly to South Korea. Philippine Foreign
Secretary Domingo Siazon said Saturday that his country had been
asked to serve as a transit point.
Hwang is the most senior official to flee impoverished North Korea.
He has been marooned in the consular compound since arriving Feb.
12. Since then, Chinese and South Korean officials have negotiated
his fate.
ALSO . . . IN EGYPT, 15 people were killed when their bus
plunged into a canal, 80 miles south of Cairo, after the driver
lost control of the vehicle, police said. . . . ALGERIAN POLICEsaid they killed 50 Islamic militants in weekend battles. Losses
among government forces were not reported. Insurgents want to
topple the military-backed government and install an Islamic state.
Peaceful vote in El Salvador
Turnout low: A peasant in Panchimalco, El Salvador, votes
in nationwide elections Sunday in which leftist rebels who laid
aside arms five years ago to end civil war are seeking a share
of power. There were no reports of violence.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Reuters; PHOTO, B/W, Yves Herman, Reuters; PHOTO, B/W, AP; PHOTO, B/W, Rutilio Enamorado, Reuters