Demonstrators brave the 93-degree heat Wednesday in central London as they make their way to Westminster Palace.
LONDON One week after a massive high-rise apartment fire killed 79 people, supporters of the victims and now-homeless residents marched to Parliament on Wednesday to express anger over what some are calling Britain's Hurricane Katrina moment.
Investigators have not confirmed the cause of last week's blaze at the 24-story Grenfell Tower, a public housing complex in London's wealthy North Kensington neighborhood. One theory is a faulty refrigerator exploded in a fourth-floor apartment, and flames quickly engulfed the structure.
In the following days, the horror and frustration over Britain's worst disaster in years have turned into public outrage.
"How does this happen in a modern city like London? We have all these regulations. Whoever is responsible needs to go to jail," said truck driver Thomas Rider, 41, one of about 400 people who braved 93-degree heat for the 5-mile march to Westminster Palace.
Rider grew up not far away from Grenfell Tower and said he still drives past it every day. The demonstration included anti-government protesters calling for British Prime Minister Theresa May to resign because of the government's slow response, as well as her ruling Conservative Party's austerity cuts to welfare services and perceived disregard for the poor.
"In one of the wealthiest boroughs in the country, the demands from poor and working-class residents for the simple right to safety and security have been repeatedly and disdainfully ignored," said the group Movement for Justice By Any Means Necessary in a Face-book post announcing the march.
The demonstration was planned to coincide with Queen Elizabeth II's annual speech for the official opening of Parliament, when the government spells out its lawmaking priorities for the next two years.
After the queen's speech, the prime minister addressed Parliament and acknowledged that government support for survivors of the fire was "not good enough."
"People were left without belongings, without roofs over their heads, without even basic information about what had happened," May said. "That was a failure of state - local and national - to help people when they needed it most."
"As prime minister, I apologize for that failure," May added.
Reports since the fire revealed that a residents group had complained for years that the tower was a firetrap, but the building's managers brushed aside those concerns. There was only one fire escape route for the 120 apartments and 600 residents. There was no sprinkler system.
Perhaps most troubling, the building was refurbished last year with material that included a type of exterior cladding that could have allowed the fire to rapidly spread.
"We don't need to wait five years, 10 years for an inquiry. We need justice now," said Antonia Bright, one of the march's organizers.
May, who already has said there will be a public inquiry, announced Wednesday plans for a new civil disaster reaction task force. The government also confirmed that 68 apartments in a luxury development in Kensington would be made available to those left homeless by the fire.
One sign at Wednesday's march said "Britain's Hurricane Katrina," a reference to the 2005 storm that struck New Orleans, leaving thousands without shelter and supplies amid a slow government response.
Watching the demonstration snake through north London was Anthony Garner, 70, a Louisiana native who has lived in Britain almost 30 years.
"This was about poor people," he said. "Katrina was about poor people."