As part of our coverage of Pride Month, we asked 10 members of the L.G.B.T.Q. community to reflect on their experiences. Here is one of their responses. Scroll down for more.
______ 
  As a young man, I spent several years as a member of the radical Catholic Worker Movement, founded by Dorothy Day and Peter Maurin.
  In 1986, I made my home with a handful of other volunteers and several dozen homeless people at Saint Joseph House in New York City, just off the Bowery, in the Lower East Side. Our community, which was dedicated to Jesus's message of peace, nonviolence and love, engaged in resistance against President Ronald Reagan's nuclear arms race and military interventions in Central America, and every day fed hundreds of homeless men.
  That Halloween, I came down for breakfast to find several of my openly gay co-workers poring through copies of a Vatican document, just published in The New York Times. They were clearly in anguish, clutching their hair, sighing, saying, ''I cannot believe it, this is so horrible.'' They were reading a letter to the world's bishops from Cardinal Joseph Ratzinger, who two decades later would become Pope Benedict XVI.
  The letter, titled ''Homosexualitatis Problema,'' Latin for ''the problem of homosexuality,'' was the Vatican's first major response to the L.G.B.T.Q. rights movement, and especially to nascent efforts within the Catholic Church to treat L.G.B.T.Q. people with openness and understanding. And the response was crystal clear: No such openness could be tolerated. Its language severely upped the ante of hostility. Some theologians had proposed that the condition of being homosexual was morally neutral, or even good. ''No,'' was the letter's response: ''It is a more or less strong tendency ordered toward an intrinsic moral evil; and thus the inclination itself must be seen as an objective disorder.''
  As for the efforts of L.G.B.T.Q. Catholics to find spaces of acceptance in the church: They were to be henceforth forbidden.
  After reading the letter, we commiserated about the alarm and terror we felt. But finally, we had to put the document aside. We hadn't any more time to consider being labeled by our church leaders as disordered and evil; hundreds of homeless men were waiting for us to feed them.
  Thirty-three years later, I still experience the tethering of religious condemnation of L.G.B.T.Q. people with homelessness, as I manage the Ali Forney Center, the nation's largest organization dedicated to homeless L.G.B.T.Q. youth. Over 1,400 youths walk through our doors each year. By far the most common reason they cite for their homelessness is their parents' rejection and hostility, borne of religious beliefs.
  Indeed, a 2010 study by San Francisco State University found that parents who identify as ''strongly religious'' are significantly more likely to reject their L.G.B.T.Q. children.
  As a Christian, I see this phenomenon of judgment and rejection as a betrayal of Christ's message of God's unfailing parental love. If we can recognize that 40 percent of all the unaccompanied homeless youth in our nation are L.G.B.T.Q., then we are compelled to answer an urgent question: How can we encourage all churches to foster loving protection, rather than cruel rejection?
  I pray that religious institutions will consider how homophobia and transphobia create a climate that endangers L.G.B.T.Q. youths.
  Carl Siciliano is the founder and executive director of the Ali Forney Center, dedicated to homeless L.G.B.T.Q. youth.
  More Reflections on Life After Stonewall
  Gavin Grimm: ''It was a truth I had known since I was 5. I was a boy.''
  I was 12 when I first heard the word ''transgender.'' I learned it through the internet and I knew immediately that it fit my experiences. But in 2012, there was not much in the way of trans media, and given the lack of affirmation or resources, I stepped away from that term. I was also in a conservative household in a conservative community, and already struggling with feelings of not fitting in. Keep reading >
  ______
  Camille Perri: It's Not a Bad Time to Be Queer, If You're Rich and White
  It wasn't until I got to a private university in the late 1990s that I learned the phrase for the kind of poor my family was: not sleeping-on-the-street poor, but always-worrying-about-money poor. My-father-worked-two-jobs-poor, but my-mother-still-had-to-remove-items-from-our-shopping-cart-at-the-grocery-store poor. It was called ''working class.'' Before college, passing as ''not poor'' had been my way of life, much in the way that trying (and failing) to pass as ''not gay'' had been my way of life. Keep reading >
  ______
  Barbara Smith: Why I Left the Mainstream Queer Rights Movement
  I enthusiastically participated in the first National March on Washington for Lesbian and Gay Rights in 1979. About 100,000 of us were there from around the country, a good turnout but much smaller than subsequent marches -- when being out and proud was less dangerous. At the second national march, in 1987, I was invited to be one of eight major speakers. It was exhilarating to speak before a crowd of nearly one million people. Three decades later, despite some genuine efforts to increase diversity, especially in progressive movement circles, exclusivity and elitism still divide us. Keep reading >
  ______
  Julia Serano: The Science of Gender Is Rarely Simple
  Most anti-discrimination policies intended to protect transgender people are centered on gender identity, a term that originated in the field of psychology and that has been used for over half a century to refer to individuals' deeply held understanding of what gender they are. It may or may not align with the sex assigned at birth. Opponents of transgender rights have increasingly worked to shift conversations and policy language away from gender and toward biological sex. Keep reading >
  ______
  Mandana Mofidi: Coming Out to Myself, for Myself
  At 9 years old, I was unable to dodge a speeding car heading directly at me. The impact separated me from my bike and sent me flying in the air before landing face-first into concrete. My nose was broken and my four front teeth shattered, along with my jaw. But the pain and embarrassment of my new face -- a crooked nose and a toothless smile -- didn't come close to what I felt when I discovered I was a lesbian at 13. Keep reading >
  ______
  Cecilia Gentili: Did the 'T' Fall Off of 'L.G.B.T.Q.'?
  A short time ago during a meeting, I was asked by a gay man if we should keep the ''T'' in ''L.G.B.T.Q.'' I gagged and quickly asked him, why should we do that? I was then bombarded with an array of explanations -- everything from ''gender is different from sexuality'' to ''the needs of the 'T' community are different.'' Add gasping to my gagging. Keep reading >
  ______
  Carl Siciliano: Catholic, Queer and Homeless
  As a young man, I spent several years as a member of the radical Catholic Worker Movement, founded by Dorothy Day and Peter Maurin. In 1986, I made my home with a handful of other volunteers and several dozen homeless people at Saint Joseph House in New York City, just off the Bowery, in the Lower East Side. Our community, which was dedicated to Jesus's message of peace, nonviolence and love, engaged in resistance against President Ronald Reagan's nuclear arms race and military interventions in Central America, and every day fed hundreds of homeless men. Keep reading >
  ______
  Asia Kate Dillon: Stand Up for the Most Marginalized
  I want to respectfully acknowledge that the land on which this essay was written is the occupied territory of the Lenape people. As I reflect on the 50th anniversary of Stonewall, I am drawn into remembrance of those who came before: Marsha P. Johnson, Sylvia Rivera, all the trans women, femmes and people of color who started the queer revolution long before I was born. Keep reading >
  ______
  Laura Bullard: One Closet, Two Secrets
  At 22, I was the youngest regular at the local pub by 30 years. It had taken me close to a year to earn my seat, but Joe, the bartender, would see me walk in, cut an empty can in half with his pocketknife to make an ashtray, and place it on my table with a Pabst Blue Ribbon and a rocks glass of bourbon filled to the brim, no rocks. Keep reading >
  ______
  Kate Bornstein: My Gender? Oh, It's Nothing
  In March I turned 71, and I have been analyzing gender since I was 4. In 1952, in my nursery school, we had to line up by gender, and the line for the boys looked like no fun at all. So off I toddled to the girls' line, where I stood until the teacher gently made me line up with the ''other little boys.'' I spent the next three decades of my life studying boys and men and acting like them, all the while knowing I wasn't male. Keep reading >
  This is a more complete version of the story than the one that appeared in print.         

https://www.nytimes.com/2019/06/19/us/carl-siciliano-religion-homeless-lgbtq.html

Graphic

 
PHOTO