God's Name In Vain
 The Wrongs and Rights
 of Religion in Politics.
 By Stephen L. Carter.
 248 pp. New York:
 Basic Books. $26.
Visit a church at random next Sunday and you will probably encounter a few dozen people sprinkled thinly over a sanctuary that was built to accommodate hundreds or even thousands. The empty pews and white-haired congregants lend credence to those who argue that traditional religious worship is dying out. Rich congregations survive through endowments that pay the staff and keep the buildings in good repair. But threadbare congregations limp along with mounting bills, in leaky sanctuaries until they can no longer afford to remain open. By one estimate, as many as 50 of these small, struggling churches shut their doors for good each week during the mid 1990's -- a staggering total once you do the yearly math. Vacant wooden churches, bleached gray by the sun, are common in rural America. But in the land-hungry city of New York, dead churches are gutted to make nightclubs, supermarkets and, especially, condominiums, in which the vaulted ceilings above the sanctuary become a valued selling point.
The quest for spiritual fulfillment has moved away from church and into the secular world, where prayer and religious yearnings are displayed more publicly than ever -- in a fashion that was hardly imaginable a quarter-century ago. Americans are practicing a spacious ecumenicalism that draws on traditional faith while accommodating a broad range of religious inflections, including those that have migrated into this country from Asia, South America and the Caribbean. Traditionalists see this as the equivalent of barhopping by a generation that values self-fulfillment and personal freedom over religious discipline and duty. But the traditional church is also at fault. It has failed to present religion in a style that the modern world could accept and understand -- and has lost touch with the evangelistic impulse that built the great congregations in the first place. To put it in business terms, the traditional church has failed to protect its franchise and its market share.
The new ecumenicalism has reached even into Congress, which opened a session this September with a prayer by a Hindu priest, whose religion embraces a pantheon containing thousands of gods and a cosmology that differs strikingly from the Western one. The ecumenical impulse is evident at the bookstore, where books on spiritual development have sold so well as to make folk heroes of the poet Robert Bly and the Afrocentric spiritualist Iyanla Vanzant as well as of the Dalai Lama. In the sports arena, professional football and basketball players kneel conspicuously to pray after the big game. And let's not forget the political campaign, where statements of belief are now seen as mandatory, and flow daily into the public record.
Anyone who mocks another's religion is in for a drubbing in the public square. This punishment was administered to Bob Jones, the president of Bob Jones University, for casting the Roman Catholic Church as "the religion of Antichrist"; to Louis Farrakhan, the minisster of the Nation of Islam, for defaming Judaism; and, just this fall, to a conservative fundamentalist group, the Family Research Council, whose Web site attacked Congress for that Hindu prayer.
The Yale law professor and evangelical Episcopalian Stephen Carter has somehow missed the evidence of this new ecumenicalism. In his 1993 book "The Culture of Disbelief," Carter argued that religious Americans were under siege -- in the language of the old Negro spiritual, " 'buked and scorned" at every turn. He continues this line of argument in "God's Name in Vain," claiming that our culture marginalizes religion, making it "easy to paint people who put God first as dangerous fanatics." Carter's colleagues at Yale will not be happy about the bitterly written portion of this book that portrays unnamed "elite campuses" as places where "it is perfectly acceptable for professors to use their classrooms to attack religion, to mock it . . . to refer to those to whom faith really matters as dupes."
The claim that an elite university would tolerate open religious bigotry is implausible on its face. In an age of speech codes and rigidly enforced tolerance, a professor who trashed a student's religion would be brought up on charges and subjected to institutional ridicule. But the threshold for what Carter defines as an antireligious attack turns out to be very low. Judging from the examples in "God's Name in Vain," he regards even the slightest challenge to a statement of faith -- even a statement of faith by a politician -- as a blatant insult to religious people generally. He also mistakes the widespread public revulsion at the fundamentalist culture wars of the 1980's and 90's for disdain of religion in general. This argument borders on the preposterous, as does Carter's attempt to liken the civil rights movement of the 1960's to those culture wars.
"God's Name in Vain" argues that a religious voice should be welcome in democratic politics, but cautions that religion loses its integrity and legitimacy when it succumbs to the lure of the merely political. The proper role of religion, he asserts, is to serve as a moral witness from afar, so that when religious believers come to politics, they come "purified, as prophetic voice calling the nation to account for its wrongs rather than as angry voices telling the nation what to do." Great moral conflicts -- like the fight against slavery -- require sorties into politics. But as a rule, Carter believes, politics robs religion of its "prophetic" power and its ability to witness in the biblical sense of the word. By Carter's lights, both the civil rights movement and the Christian Coalition were co-opted and eventually brought low by staying too long in the great Babylon of electoral politics.
When asked to name his favorite philosopher during the campaign, George W. Bush offered Jesus. Vice President Al Gore made his own play for the religious vote by selecting as his running mate Senator Joseph Lieberman, an observant Orthodox Jew who sounded at times like a fundamentalist on the stump. Carter completed "God's Name in Vain" before my colleagues and I on The New York Times's editorial page chided Senator Lieberman for seeming to "cross the boundaries of tolerance" by asserting that morality could not be maintained without religion. That Carter would have made much of the Lieberman dust-up is clear from how he treats the nonevent surrounding Bush's citing of Jesus. Carter attributes a sinister motive to those who took exception, writing that "the objection to the expression of Bush's view was really an objection to the view expressed: that is, that he was foolish, or perhaps undemocratic, to be influenced more by Jesus than by anyone else." In other words, Carter views even reasonable challenges to statements of belief as bigoted and antireligious by their very nature.
It is possible to scrutinize Bush's statement without making any judgment at all about truth or falsity. He might have named, say, Alfred North Whitehead instead of Jesus. But by naming the latter he signaled religious voters -- especially those on the Republican right -- that he would be their man in the White House. This was also a signal to working-class voters, who generally resent intellectuals and were baffled when Al Gore mentioned his admiration for the French philosopher Maurice Merleau-Ponty. (Bush made fun of Gore for this on the campaign trail.) One could take note of these political implications without disrespecting Bush's beliefs.
Carter's contention along the way that the state should cede more power to religion will strike many people as a recipe for warfare in the streets. But his case for school voucher programs that permit children to attend parochial schools at public expense is strong -- and could yet prove prophetic, given how the courts are beginning to smile on the concept of public funding for religious educational institutions. The argument that millions of children must have their lives snuffed out by failing schools and incompetent teachers just to keep impregnable the wall between church and state has worn thin in millions of homes, including my own.
The traditional church's sufferings stem mainly from its failure to adapt quickly enough to new religious appetites and new social realities -- most notably, divorce, unwed motherhood, birth control, open homosexuality and the wish of women to serve as pastors. The costs of failing to keep up are evident in all those stained-glass condominiums and those miles of empty pews, as well as in highly visible defections like the one staged last month by former president Jimmy Carter, whose family had belonged to the Southern Baptist Church for generations. Carter resigned quite publicly, saying that church doctrine (which, among other things forbids the ordination of women) had become so "rigid" as to be no longer compatible with his faith.
"God's Name in Vain" bypasses these ecclesiastical failures and self-inflicted wounds, focusing instead on what the author sees as the corrosive effects of wading too deeply into the dangers of electoral politics. His advice to religions is: spend less time in the world -- a place of depravity" -- and "more time in the garden," creating a "a moral cocoon" consisting of family, community and institutions over which religious people have control. The moral cocoon would be warm and cozy, but religion is by its very nature a group activity -- and the group dies out without new blood. To stay alive and prosper, religions must keep abreast of a messy, nondenominational world that is dominated at the moment by religious flexibility. The retreat "into the garden," as Stephen Carter terms it, is a moribund strategy that would feed institutional decline.
The problem is that fundamentalism is incompatible with the capacious ecumenicalism that rules the public square. The fundamentalist movement arose in the early 20th century as a backlash against modernism, science and the life of the mind. Early fundamentalist doctrine attacked competing religions -- especially Catholicism, which it portrayed as an agent of the Antichrist -- and insisted on the literal truth of the Bible, a strict return to "fundamental" principles and a thoroughgoing rejection of modernity. The next wave, sometimes called evangelicalism, moved away from hard-core antimodernism but retained a profound anti-intellectualism that is only just beginning to fade. Evangelical colleges are just beginning to shake off this tradition, but cannot yet be deemed cosmopolitan. The fundamentalist-evangelical axis that made itself felt during the culture wars carries the hallmark of the early movement: a finished, proprietary version of divine truth that precludes other interpretations.
Carter consistently blurs the differences that still exist between fundamentalism and religious forms or movements that share none of its aggressively proprietary nature. The notion that the civil rights movement of the 1960's has anything in common with the culture warriors is both distasteful and imprecise. The civil rights movement used the black Southern religious structure to win basic, secular justice, including the right to vote and receive a decent education. The culture warriors tried to inflict minority religious values on a wider world that fundamentalists have always viewed as depraved and bound for hell. The public backlash against the religious zealotry of that period was wholly justified. By undertaking a culture war, religious conservatives strengthened the public distaste for religious combat and enhanced the public appreciation for religious tolerance.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Drawing (Boris Kulikov)