The man Pope John Paul II chose today as the interim leader of the Boston Archdiocese is a welcome contrast to Cardinal Bernard F. Law, priests and Catholic lay leaders who know the new appointee say.
     Those priests and lay Catholics say the pope's choice, Auxiliary Bishop Richard G. Lennon, is a good listener, is easy to get along with and made a genuine effort to get to know people who worked for him in Boston's western suburbs, where until now he was in charge of one of the archdiocese's five regions. 
 In contrast, many people inside and outside the church say, Cardinal Law got in trouble partly because he seemed aloof and showed little interest in the daily concerns of his priests and parishioners.
Bishop Lennon, whom the pope named apostolic administrator of Boston, is a 55-year-old native of the area who was elevated to auxiliary bishop only 18 months ago. 
He has been somewhat removed from the sexual abuse scandal because for the last three years, even during the period since his promotion, he has been rector of St. John's Seminary here, the school that produces most of Boston's priests (including himself), and so has not been involved in central decision-making inside the archdiocese. Before that, he worked as an administrator in the chancery.
As auxiliary bishop in charge of the archdiocesan West Region, he has shown a "willingness to go to the parishes and participate in a listening session, and he's heard what people have on their minds," said Jim Post, president of Voice of the Faithful, a rapidly growing group of lay Catholics organized in response to the scandal.
"He knows what it's like to speak with survivors" of priests' sexual abuse "and with the laity of this troubled diocese," Mr. Post said. "As we look ahead, there's no quality that's more important."
One critic of Cardinal Law, the Rev. Walter Cuenin, pastor of Our Lady Help of Christians parish in Newton, a West Region town, called Bishop Lennon "a very decent man."
"He is easy to work with," Father Cuenin said, "and will be a good person to guide us during the transition."
Bishop Lennon, he added, "has been out here to say Mass and for dinner and to get to know people; he is a very bright man."
Mitchell Garabedian, a lawyer who represented victims of John J. Geoghan, whose sexual abuse of children as a priest had a central role in the scandal, said he had deposed Bishop Lennon in several lawsuits but had found nothing incriminating about his actions as a onetime low-level administrator in the chancery.
"We didn't link him to any negligence," Mr. Garabedian said.
Bishop Lennon made no formal public appearances today but issued a brief statement through the archdiocese in which he pledged "to work towards healing as a church."
"Please pray for me as I pray for all of you," he said, "most especially for all victims and families who have been hurt by the sin of sexual abuse of children by clergy."
It is unclear how much authority Bishop Lennon will have in dealing with the serious issues confronting the archdiocese, like whether to seek bankruptcy protection as a way of coping with hundreds of lawsuits stemming from the scandal. Nor is it clear how long he will be in his post before the pope names someone, possibly him, as the new archbishop.
The Rev. Christopher Coyne, a spokesman for the archdiocese, said Bishop Lennon "will have a wide range of authority."
"He is not just a caretaker," Father Coyne said.
Father Coyne said that in working with Bishop Lennon in the archdiocese headquarters, "I've come to know him as a friend, and I think he is the person who can lead us forward to where we need to be."
Bishop Lennon is "a man of integrity, a sincere man, a hard worker," Father Coyne added.
Bishop Lennon was born in Arlington, a working-class Boston suburb, where his father was deputy fire chief. He grew up in a deeply religious Catholic family and lived within sight of St. James Church, where he became an altar boy. When the church was built in 1914, he once said, his three uncles carried the bricks in horse-drawn wagons.
Bishop Lennon, a tall man with a strong physical presence, enrolled in Boston College after graduating from high school but left after two years to study for the priesthood. It was not a sudden decision, he later said: "I was not struck off a horse."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: Auxiliary Bishop Richard G. Lennon with Donna M. Morrissey, archdiocesan spokeswoman, after being chosen by the pope yesterday. (David L. Ryan/Boston Globe)