The Elk Grove Township Democratic committeeman facing her first challenge in a decade is questioning the size of her opponent's war chest, saying he could be beholden to special interests.  
John Williams, 33, of Elk Grove Village, raised $11,955 from July 20 through Dec. 31, according to state records. Williams, an International Union of Painters and Allied Trades officer, has received the bulk of his contributions from labor organizations.  
Joan Brennan, who has headed the Democratic Party in Elk Grove Township since 1978, said Friday she expects to spend about $1,000 on campaign fliers and postage costs before the March 19 primary.  
Brennan, 70, of Elk Grove Village, said the money raised by Williams was inappropriate for an unpaid position within the party.  
"I think it's obscene for a Democratic committeeman race," Brennan said.  
The committeeman chooses the 100 or so precinct captains and has a role in picking new township officials, congressmen and legislators, if they retire or die in office.  
Brennan called herself a "fiscal conservative," who is trying to curb her campaign costs.  
Williams' largest contributions include $5,000 from the Painters District Council No. 14 Political Action Fund, the umbrella organization for Williams' own International Union of Painters. The Construction and General Laborers District Council of Chicago and Vicinity chipped in $1,000.  
The Northwest Suburban Teachers Union Local 1211, which represents teachers in Palatine-Schaumburg High School District 211, gave $500.  
Williams defended the contributions he has received from organizations. They represent, he said, the interests of many residents of Elk Grove Township, which includes parts of Elk Grove Village, Arlington Heights, Mount Prospect and Des Plaines.  
"Elk Grove Township is a working-class area and I'm supported by the working families that live in the area," Williams said.  
Of the money he collected, Williams spent $7,158 on campaign literature and refreshments for meetings.  
Sharon Alter, a professor of history and political science at Harper College, noted that it isn't surprising to see committeeman candidates in Elk Grove and Palatine townships raising substantial contributions.  
Alter pointed to the Republican committeeman race in Palatine Township between Inverness Village President Jack Tatooles, the incumbent, and Gary Skoien, of Palatine, and Palatine Mayor Rita Mullins, who is running as a write-in candidate.  
The position can be very powerful as it offers publicity and can provide a launching ground for those seeking higher political office, Alter said.

Graphic

 
Joan Brennan; John Williams