WASHINGTON -- Liberals and conservatives agreed on something Wednesday: a new, far-reaching, bipartisan plan to balance the budget and stabilize the national debt goes too far.
Groups representing seniors and working-class Americans, such as the Campaign for America's Future, criticized the latest deficit-reduction plan in the nation's capital -- this one by the independent Bipartisan Policy Center -- because it would reduce future Social Security benefits and turn Medicare into a voucher program.
Anti-tax groups, including Americans for Tax Reform, lambasted the plan out Wednesday because it would slash tax breaks for millions of Americans and create a new, 6.5% national sales tax similar to those in most European nations.
The near-unanimous opposition from right and left was a further sign of how difficult it will be -- economically and politically -- to get the nation's fiscal house in order amid $1.4 trillion annual deficits and a debt that will top $14 trillion early next year.
The plan presented by former Republican senator Pete Domenici of New Mexico and former White House and congressional budget director Alice Rivlin, a Democrat, is important because it could guide the deliberations of a more powerful presidential commission that's due to report its findings Dec. 1.
That panel, chaired by former Clinton White House chief of staff Erskine Bowles and former senator Alan Simpson of Wyoming, has been meeting privately this week to go over a plan offered by the two chairmen that would cut spending, benefits and every current tax break. It, too, faced immediate opposition when it was unveiled last week.
Unless 14 of 18 members of that commission agree on a single government austerity program, Congress won't have to act, and the growing problem of unsustainable budget imbalances will be kicked into next year, when President Obama proposes his 2012 spending plan.
"We need the president of the United States to lead," Domenici said. "We have a big problem. It cries out for big solutions."
Here are key proposals from the Bipartisan Policy Center:
*Medicare. The federal program serving 47 million seniors and people with disabilities would be turned after 2018 into a voucher program. If spending rose by more than 1% above general inflation, patients would have to pay the additional costs, or they could shop for less expensive private plans.
"Basically, they're capping spending on the Medicare program," said Maria Freese of the left-leaning National Committee to Preserve Social Security and Medicare. "It's a backdoor way of privatizing the program."
*Social Security. Future benefits would be reduced to take into consideration the aging of America. Beneficiaries whose average annual earnings when they worked topped about $40,000 would receive less. Cost-of-living increases could be reduced. And the payroll-tax cap would rise to include wages above the current $106,800 cutoff level.
"We're going at this backwards," said Roger Hickey, co-director of the liberal Campaign for America's Future, which favors more government spending to stimulate the economy and create jobs. He said the plan hurts working-class Americans more than those in upper-income brackets because the former depend more on Social Security and Medicare.
*Taxes. Taxes would be increased by $2.3 trillion through 2020, mostly by creating a new sales tax and wiping out popular tax breaks. Six income-tax rates ranging from 10% to 35% would be reduced to just two rates, 15% and 27%.
Deductions for mortgage interest and charitable contributions would be replaced with 15% refundable credits that anyone who owns a home or gives to charity could claim.
The conservative Americans for Tax Reform said the 6.5% sales tax would mimic value-added taxes in Europe that now average about 20%. Internationally, those taxes range from 5% in Canada and Japan to 25.5% in Iceland.
A proposed one-year break from the 12.4% payroll tax shared by workers and employees would be welcome, said the tax group's Ryan Ellis, but, "it's easier to say than it is to do."
A Bipartisan Policy Center plan to slow the growth of the $13.7 trillion national debt differs from a plan floated last week by the chairmen of President Obama's fiscal commission.
List
Comparing twodebt-restructuring plans
Proposal   Center's plan   Chairmen's plan
Individual tax rates   Shrink six rates to two, 15% and 27%   Create three rates of 8%, 14% and 23%
Corporate tax rates   Reduce 35% rate to 27%   Reduce rate to 26%
Tax breaks   Eliminate most breaks; replace deductions for mortgage interest and charitable contributions with 15% refundable credits   Eliminate all tax breaks
Other taxes   Establish a 6.5% national sales tax; impose excise tax on sugary drinks   Increase federal gas tax by 15 cents
Medicare   Raise premiums for doctors' visits; cap federal assistance; encourage private health plans  Reduce payments to doctors and other providers; cap federal assistance; increase patients' co-payment
Social Security   Reduce growth in benefits for upper-income recipients; raise payroll tax cap on wages; change cost-of-living adjustments   Similar proposals, plus a gradual increase in the retirement age to 69
Domestic and  defense spending   Cut $2.1 trillion by 2020   Cut $1.5 trillion by 2020
Total savings  through 2020   $5.9 trillion   $3.8 trillion
Sources: National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform; Bipartisan Policy Center 

Graphic

 
PHOTO, B/W, Haraz N. Ghanbari, AP
PHOTO, B/W, Mark Lennihan, AP