elect President Donald - there Trump 's no says way if Russia to know was hacking behind the of accounts e-mail .
Donald Trump says it's "ridiculous" to believe Moscow helped him win the presidency, and he rejects intelligence findings that Russia intervened in the U.S. election.
"I think it's just another excuse," Trump said in an interview aired on Fox News Sunday. "I don't believe it. ... Every week it's another excuse."
During the interview, Trump also appeared to reject the idea of setting up a blind trust to manage his assets during his presidency, saying that his "executives" and his children would run his companies in his absence.
Democrats and some Republicans have called for hearings and investigations into the CIA's conclusion that Russia authorized hacking and other tactics in order to help Trump and hurt Democratic candidate Hillary Clinton during the campaign.
sued a joint statement Sunday with incoming Senate Democratic leader Charles Schumer, D-N.Y., calling for a bipartisan effort to explore the allegations and defend the nation against cyberattacks. The two were joined by Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C. and Sen, Jack Reed, D-R.I., the bipartisan leaders of the Senate Armed Services Committee.
"For years, foreign adversaries have directed cyberattacks at America's physical, economic, and military infrastructure, while stealing our intellectual property," their statement said. "Now our democratic institutions have been targeted. Recent reports of Russian interference in our election should alarm every American."
In his Fox interview, Trump said Democrats are pushing the idea of Russian involvement in an effort to explain their surprise election loss.
past four weeks, he has reassured Republicans and alarmed Democrats by appointments that largely reflect GOP orthodoxy - from a Labor secretary-designate who opposes raising the minimum wage to a Housing and Urban Development secretary-designate who warns that subsidized housing fosters dependency.
His domestic team would have been a good fit for just about any of his Republican primary rivals, though Trump's friendly stance toward Russia and its provocative president, Vladimir Putin, is at odds with GOP tradition and the party's leading congressional voices on foreign policy.
So far, Trump's choices - including top jobs for a trio of veterans of Goldman Sachs, a firm he blasted at campaign rallies - haven't reflected the populist impulses that fueled his appeal to some white working-class voters or his vow to "drain the swamp" in Washington of donors and other insiders.
"I think we're going to have one of the great Cabinets ever put together," Trump boasted. The nominations, announced via Twitter and at campaign-style rallies, provide clues about how he will operate and what he will do after the Inauguration.
Here are some things we're learning:
u'I like generals.'
"I think generals are terrific, you know?" Trump said in Sunday's interview on Fox News. "They go through schools and they sort of end up at the top of the pyramid, and it's like a test. They passed the test of life." He's picked three of them to top jobs: retired Marine Corps general James "Mad Dog" Mattis as secretary of Defense, retired Marine Corps general John Kelly as secretary of Homeland Security, and retired Army general Michael Flynn as national security adviser.
He's also met at Trump Tower with retired Army general David Petraeus and retired Navy admiral James Stavridis as he weighed the possibilities for secretary of State.
uCorporate command.
Not since the Eisenhower administration have so many business executives landed top government jobs, making Trump's Cabinet the wealthiest in American history. "I want people that made a fortune because now they're negotiating with you," he told supporters Thursday in Des Moines during his "thank you" tour. "It's not different than a great baseball player or a great golfer."
He has designated former Goldman Sachs banker Steve Ban-non as his senior White House strategist, Goldman veteran Steve Mnuchin as Treasury secretary, billionaire investor Wilbur Ross as Commerce secretary and billionaire activist Betsy DeVos as Education secretary. Another billionaire, Chicago Cubs co-owner Todd Ricketts, has been named deputy Commerce secretary.
Linda McMahon, a former CEO of World Wrestling Entertainment, has been chosen to head the Small Business Administration. A millionaire who is married to a billionaire, she contributed $7 million to pro-Trump super PACs this fall.
paign uClimate in the crosshairs -change . cam-
Last week, environmental activists were encouraged when Trump met with former vice president Al Gore and actor Leonardo DiCaprio, both activists on climate change. Then the president-elect selected as head of the Environmental Protection Agency Oklahoma attorney general Scott Pruitt - a skeptic of climate change who repeatedly has sued the EPA to push back regulations aimed at reducing emissions from coal-fired power plants.
Rep. Cathy McMorris Rodgers, R-Wash., an ally of the fossil-fuel industry, is reported to be Trump's choice to lead the Interior Department. She has supported legislation to open the Atlantic Ocean to drilling and prevent the Interior Department from regulating hydraulic fracturing.
Trump, who during the campaign called climate change "a big scam," now says it's up for debate and decries the burden of regulations on businesses. (Mainstream scientists overwhelmingly agree that the climate is changing, in part because of human activity.) "I'm still open-minded," Trump said Sunday. "Nobody really knows."
He complained that China, Mexico and other countries were "eating our lunch" because of environmental regulations. "We can't let all of these permits, that take forever to get, stop our jobs," he said, adding that he was studying whether to pull the United States out of the Paris Climate Agreement. "I don't want that agreement to put us at a competitive disadvantage with other countries."
uRussian roulette.
Trump's stance on Russia, including his call for more cooperation with Putin, puts him at odds with many of the Republicans allied with him on other fronts. Some of the top appointments he has made or is considering are aligned with his views. Flynn sat next to Putin last year during a paid appearance in Moscow for Russia Today, a TV network financed by the Kremlin. Tillerson, who has negotiated business deals with Putin for years, was awarded Russia's Order of Friendship in 2013.