MEXICO CITY -- A different weekend in Ciudad Juarez, a different party and again a massacre.
Gunmen burst into a small concrete house in a working-class Ciudad Juarez neighborhood where a family was celebrating a son's 14th birthday and opened fire, killing 13 people and wounding 20, state officials said Saturday.
A 13-year-old girl was the youngest of the dead, which included several older teenagers. A 9-year-old boy was wounded.
Ciudad Juarez has become one of the most violent cities in the world since the Mexican government began its crackdown on drug cartels four years ago, and murder fueled by the drug trade has become so routine in Ciudad Juarez that residents are not easily shocked. But the massacre on Friday night marked one of several moments in the city this year when the killing crossed a line that everyone from Juarenses to President Felipe Calderon could not bear.
Mr. Calderon sent a message on Saturday via Twitter, saying, ''With sadness and profound indignation, the federal government expresses its most energetic repudiation of the murder of various young people in Ciudad Juarez.''
Friday's killings bore striking similarities to another mass killing in January in another working class neighborhood of Ciudad Juarez, where gunmen killed 15 people, mostly teenagers, at a party inside a house. Most of those partygoers were students, the children of working-class parents intent on giving them an education and keeping them out of the city's gangs.
The Ciudad Juarez police would not say if they thought Friday's killings were drug-related, but Mr. Calderon's response was markedly different from his offhand comment after the January deaths, when he said that the killings then appeared to be the work of rival gangs settling scores.
When it emerged that those victims appeared to have no link to drug cartels and the gangs that act as their enforcers, Mr. Calderon had to backtrack. His blunder highlighted a truth that public officials are reluctant to admit -- that a growing number of innocent victims are being caught up in Mr. Calderon's war against drug cartels. Since then, the government has laid out a plan to invest in social programs in Ciudad Juarez, in the hope that new high schools and renovated sports facilities might offer alternatives to the young people who are the drug gangs' recruits.
The house where Friday's killings took place had been rented by Francisco Lopez to hold a birthday party for his son, also Francisco, who was turning 14.
Mr. Lopez and his son survived, but Mr. Lopez's wife, Martina Arteaga, 30, was shot dead. The couple's 3-month-old baby, in a stroller next to her mother, was unharmed.
Mr. Lopez told El Diario de Juarez, a local newspaper: ''I feel so much pain and rage. I am sure they will never catch the people who did this.''

http://www.nytimes.com