TITLE: SWISSVALE BARGAIN; 1900 HOUSE HAS STAINED GLASS AND $99,900 PRICE TAG
TOPIC: Business Ownership
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-09-01 00:00:00
SECTION: MAGAZINE; Pg. G-4
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Housing', 'Business Ownership', 'Sports']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.9952283055482243]

BODY:
Brea Chiappa and her brother Michael are in business together, purchasing and managing rental properties in Maryland.
She also happens to be a big fan of Pittsburgh. So when the opportunity came up to buy four rental properties here, they went for it.
There is only one problem: Their Maryland business is booming and they don't have time to give their Pittsburgh properties the hands-on treatment they take pride in.
"Our original plan was for me to move out there, but our Maryland properties took off," Ms. Chiappa said. "We grew from five little buildings to 29, and we're doing great with that."
The Chiappas have put their Pittsburgh properties on the market, including 7515 Ellesmere St. (MLS No. 1668210) in Swissvale. The house has three bedrooms and one bathroom and is priced at $99,900 with Bill Jander of RE/MAX Select Realty (remaxselectpittsburgh.com or 412-478-2429).
Ms. Chiappa is the first to tell you the 124-year-old house isn't perfect.
The three-story brick structure sits on a 0.07-acre lot and has a floor plan that boasts 1,408 square feet of living area, much of which needs attention.
But, it has solid bones.
Many of the original details are still present: deep wood moldings, high ceilings, hardwood flooring and some stained glass. The living and dining rooms are connected by a wide opening.
The living room features a large double window that looks out onto the covered front porch and is topped by a stained-glass transom that is similar to one by the front door. An original fireplace, which is currently blocked off, is located at the far end of the room.
The dining room, which can be accessed from the living room and kitchen, is enhanced by an original built-in cabinet and a pair of large windows that look out into the backyard.
Though the small kitchen does not come with any appliances, it's filled with light from a large window on the back wall bordered by original wood trim.
The door to the backyard is not original, but the trim that reaches to the ceiling suggests it once had a transom window. Restoring that detail would bring in more light and return some of the room's original character.
A door in the kitchen leads to the basement, with access to the backyard and a two-car detached garage. The automatic garage door opens onto Benner Way. An electrical panel could allow the new owner to turn the garage into a workshop.
On the second floor are three bedrooms; the smallest one was possibly used as a nursery and could become a home office with a large window that overlooks the backyard.
The entire upstairs is characterized by original wood flooring that needs attention. But the return would be worthwhile; you won't find that flooring at a Home Depot or Lowes.
The bathroom sports a cast-iron tub, but could use a new vanity.
A sizable surprise is the attic. It's a big, wide-open room where the ceiling echoes the angles of the roof but provides plenty of headroom. This could be turned into bedroom, media room or playroom.
"When we had the building inspection done, we were told the roof was in good shape," said Ms. Chiappa. "The third floor's ceiling is tight, with no leaks."
The basement is dry, with a door leading to the backyard.
The house is a five-minute drive from Parkway East and close to stores and restaurants.
"There's a huge shopping plaza, grocery store, pizzeria, ice cream shop and a Mexican restaurant," said Ms. Chiappa.
Or you could head down to The Waterfront in Homestead, which is a short eight-minute drive.
The property assessment is $47,900 and the annual taxes are $1,927.
Over the past four years, six single-family homes in the 7500 block of Ellesmere Street have sold for prices ranging from $30,000 in April 2020 to $175,000 in February 2023.
The Chiappas bought this property and others for $251,041 in December 2022 (www2.alleghenycounty.us/RealEstate/).
They liked the neighborhood enough that they bought several properties there.
"It is a quiet working-class neighborhood, blue collar, very nice and quiet whenever I've been there," Ms. Chiappa said.
She is disappointed she and her brother could not do more with their Pittsburgh properties, but they might try again in the future.
"We are very hands-on. I like things done a certain way, done the right way," Ms. Chiappa said.
"We don't have the contacts to continue. Still, we'd like to come back in a bigger way when I can really get my hands dirty."
Lizabeth Gray: lgray@post-gazette.com

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The three-story brick home at 7515 Ellesmere St. in Swissvale, center, was built in 1900.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The house features its original stairs and stained balustrade.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The front porch at 7515 Ellesmere St. in Swissvale.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The double window in the living room is topped by a stained-glass transom.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The bathroom sports a cast-iron bathtub.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography photos: A built-in cabinet and a closed-in fireplace in the dining room are among the original elements in the house.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The kitchen comes without appliances.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The backyard at 7515 Ellesmere St. in Swissvale.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: Each of the three bedroom boast original wood floors.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The large attic could be used as a bedroom, media room or playroom.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography: The house features its original stairs and stained balustrade.
PHOTO: Peter Theis Photography photos: A built-in cabinet and a closed-in fireplace in the dining room are among the original elements in the house.
PHOTO: THEIS MEDIA: The double window in the living room is topped by a stained-glass transom.