He was "a fruit that has to burst its skin," she thought. "Comfort me with apples for I am sick of love. And it is a comfort, isn't it,
. . . the bounty of abandonment, the cry that means full stop."
And, so, with lush metaphors and soap operatic intensity, Mary Gordon gives us the musings of her latest heroine, the artist Monica Szabo. Szabo is the narrator of Spending: A Utopian Divertimento, a self-consciously erotic novel in which food, sex and painting all become synergistic sources of pleasure.
And nobody ends up any the worse for it.
But wait - Mary Gordon? Whose guilt-ridden Catholic heroines have always paid so dearly for their irrepressible carnal desires?
Remember Isabel, who swells up like a blimp and endures the abuse of the hateful Margaret in Final Payments (1978) - all because she had an affair with a married man? (Well, actually two married men.) Or Felicitas, the protagonist of The Company of Women (1980), whose punishment for sex is first betrayal, then pregnancy?
Even in Gordon's most recent fiction, The Rest of Life (1993), the women who narrate the trio of novellas worry incessantly about their lovers' abandonments, both past and future.
Not so in Spending. Sure, Monica worries a little. But mostly she laps up the blandishments of her self-appointed male muse - a Jewish commodities trader named only B, in a parody of Victorian erotica, who showers her with money, attention and liberal quantities of toe-curling sex.
Is this a fairy tale or what?
And how ever did Gordon come to tell it?
In the first place, it wasn't her idea.
Gordon, who speaks at 8 p.m. Thursday at the Free Library as part of its Rebuilding the Future series, admits as much. (The event is sold out, but admission to a video simulcast in the Central Library's East Gallery is free.)
Writing an erotic book from a woman's perspective was the inspiration of Gordon's English editor, who told her "erotica is really written by men for men."
The editor apparently missed out on such notorious counterexamples as Pauline Reage's Story of O and Erica Jong's more mainstream 1973 best-seller, Fear of Flying. But Gordon, 49, whose father once edited a pornographic-humor magazine, seized on the idea with gusto.
To wit:
It's always a bit of a shock, isn't it, not to be empty when you've been so empty. He made his way inside. It was relief, nothing but relief to be filled up, to be touched in such a deep place you're sure it never existed before, it only came to be at just that minute. . . .
And so on, for 301 steamy pages.
"I was mainly interested in creating a universe in which objects were very sexualized and gestures were sexualized," Gordon explains over crabcakes and tuna tartare at a popular Washington lunch spot. A diminutive woman with a ready wit, at once soft-spoken and outspoken, she wears just a touch of eyeliner and a brown suit accented by a multicolored scarf.
"I was really interested in the way the appetites feed in and out of one another," says the Barnard College English professor, whose models included the French novelists Colette and Marguerite Duras.
At 50, Gordon's heroine finds food sexy, and bathing sexy, and painting her compliant commodities trader in a state of postorgasmic bliss very sexy indeed. Some reviewers have found Monica herself annoyingly solipsistic, a reaction Gordon sees as sexist.
"What would a male have to do to be called self-indulgent?" she asks, bristling. "I don't think she's unlikable. I think she's not nice. I think there's a difference. I would really like to hang out with her. She's smart and she's funny. She's not a complete bulldozer, but she gets her work done."
In fact, one of Gordon's principal themes is what she calls "the eroticization of work - that work can be a desire and can make you revved up in the same way that sex can." In the case of men, she wanted to explore "the connection . . . between sexual potency and financial potency" - which turns out to be all too strong for Monica's muse. Gordon also is fascinated by "the difference between consumption and pleasure" in a society that she says exalts the former and is made queasy by the latter.
"Pleasure consists of anticipation, and contemplation, and then consumption," she says. "And then afterwards maybe talking about it, and reliving it, and appreciating it. We want to just cut to the chase, and get out as quickly as we can."
Gordon is best known as a moralist, a writer of serious literary fiction whose works treat the conflicts between the spirit and the flesh, the ideal and the merely ordinary. So her foray into erotica - in the form of a comic novel - has been greeted with delight by some critics, and derision by others.
Writing in The Nation, Maureen Corrigan crowed: "It's as though after all these years of kneeling, resentful but spellbound, in the darkened confessional, Gordon has decided to rend the curtains and treat herself and her readers to a vision of an earthly paradise."
But Christopher Lehmann-Haupt of the New York Times said he found Monica's "assumptions of superiority and moral rationalizations . . . insufferable" and her sexual prodigiousness exhausting. "This may be the first novel I've ever read," he sniffed, "where you skim the sex scenes to find the talky parts."
Other critics have pronounced Monica's experiences entertaining, but unreal. "A fairy tale," said Gail Caldwell in the Boston Globe, albeit a "boldly Dionysian" one.
Not true, insists Gordon, who suggests it all could happen. "I like to say improbability - not fantasy," she says.
Let's review: B, an attractive and available millionaire, offers Monica whatever she needs to do her best work. If she wants food, he appears with a picnic basket. If it's a bath she craves, he supplies her with "a stupefying array of conditioners and oils and powders." If she demands more space, he buys her a New York apartment. And when she tires of him, he simply retreats, uncomplainingly.
"Probably no man's ever going to do this," concedes Gordon. On the other hand, she says: "He's not flying. He's not turning into a donkey. . . . This is a hopeful book."
* Raised in a Catholic working-class neighborhood on Long Island, Gordon broke long ago from the confines of her upbringing. She attended parochial schools, but fled to Barnard College in 1967, when the counterculture was at its peak. She attended graduate school at Syracuse University, but never completed her doctorate on Virginia Woolf.
Instead, she wrote Final Payments, whose success launched her literary career. The novel, fashioned with grace and precision, begins with an account of an invalid father's funeral.
Eighteen years later, Gordon published The Shadow Man, a tortured memoir of her struggle to come to terms with her real-life father, who died when she was 7. A Jew who converted to Catholicism, he left a checkered legacy - unconditional love and support for his daughter, but also virulently anti-Semitic writings and, like Gatsby, a constructed past filled with lies.
Writing the memoir was "a very sad experience," Gordon says.
Married to her second husband, Arthur Cash, an English professor at the State University of New York at New Paltz, Gordon has two teenage children and calls herself "a very passionate mother."
The heroine of Spending often is consumed by a desire for solitude - a desire she shares with Gordon, who has a commuter marriage.
"Three days of the week I have that bed to myself, with books," she says, "and it's perfectly nice - having emptiness. Having that empty space around your life that you can fill in your own way is very voluptuous, I think, as women get older."
A self-declared feminist, Gordon sees her generation of women as torn between two sets of values. "We grew up with all these romantic movies, in which you fainted, and you were lifted up," she says, citing Audrey Hepburn as a prototypical film heroine.
"Well, that doesn't go away in one minute. So I think there's a great dualism. On a very deep level, we would love to be completely taken care of. . . . But our experience has told us that the price you have to pay for that in terms of autonomy is really higher than we want to pay."
As a result, she says, "I think we're in a very transitional spot."
Spending, she says, "really takes feminism for granted in a way." It says: "OK, . . . we're middle-aged, and we're still peppy. We still have energy and sex, and, you know what, the women's movement was a good thing. Because I couldn't be where I was if not for the women's movement."
Still, she agrees, she is writing against the culture at a time when the pervasive fear of AIDS and workaholic lives have made sex a relatively scarce commodity. "Most of the people I know aren't having a lot of sex," Monica declares.
Despite the women's movement, the notion of a woman having both sex and success may still be an unsettling one. As women have gotten more power, says Gordon, "we want to punish them more."
A similarly punitive instinct, she adds, may be motivating reaction to President Clinton's alleged sexual escapades. Comparing him to the picaresque hero Tom Jones, Gordon calls Clinton "a libidinally lively man," who has "made men feel inadequate, and women feel desirous in some way that they didn't want to deal with."
Gordon herself has met the President - and found his sexual aura overwhelming. "I thought I was going to die," she says. "I've never experienced anything remotely like it. . . . I just thought I was going to have to literally get oxygen, he was so sexy. And I think it's made people very hostile."

Graphic

 
PHOTO;
PHOTO
Mary Gordon, whose steamy latest novel is "Spending," will speak Thursday at the Free Library.
Mary Gordon's heroine in "Spending" is a lusty artist who finds an attractive millionaire eager to cater to her every need. The sexiness has been applauded - and derided. (Knight Ridder Tribune, DEBBI MORELLO)