TITLE: 36 Hours
TOPIC: Sports
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-12-21 00:00:00
SECTION: Section C; Column 0; Travel Desk; Pg. 8
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/1.DOCX
LABEL: ['Sports']
LABEL: [0.999999]

BODY:
Key stops
The seaside gardens of Chiesa del Santissimo Redentore, a 16th-century church, are now open to the public for the first time.   Il Palazzo Experimental and Nolinski Venezia, two new hotels, contain bars that are reinvigorating Venice's cocktail scene.
  Ca' Pesaro art museum exhibits works by Gustav Klimt, Egon Schiele, Marina Abramovic and other heavyweights.
  Where to Eat
  Il Refettorio, a stylish contemporary restaurant, serves grilled meats and inventive seafood dishes.
  La Bottiglia makes overstuffed gourmet panini.
  Pietra Rossa specializes in intricate one-bite dishes, Adriatic seafood and garden-fresh produce.
  La Sete, Estro Pane e Vino and Bea Vita are part of a new crop of natural-wine bars.
  Where to stay
  Venice Venice, an upmarket design hotel opened in 2022 in a 13th-century palazzo, offers views of the Grand Canal from many of its 43 rooms. The hotel also has an indoor-outdoor restaurant, a lifestyle boutique, and a private bar-club for guests and members. Rooms in winter start at 600 euros, or about $634.
  Opened this year after a nearly decade-long renovation, Palazzo dei Mori occupies a discreet 1400s mansion in a quiet passage. The salon and six rooms are decorated in old-world Venetian style, with gilded wood, Murano-glass chandeliers and long drapes. Rooms in winter start at ?182.
  Titian and Tintoretto are your neighbors at Combo, a 255-bed hostel occupying a former Jesuit convent alongside Santa Maria Assunta ai Gesuiti church (which contains works by the two artists). In addition to shared rooms, double rooms, lofts and apartments, the building contains a cafe-bar and public co-working space (from ?8 per day). Rooms in winter start at ?88.
  Short-term rental apartments abound in all of Venice's six zones (known as sestieri). For a tranquil stay, consider one of the more peripheral districts. Castello, on the north side, is a mix of working-class residential neighborhoods and bustling pockets of restaurants and bars. An island unto itself, Giudecca has a more local and village-y feel in spots, along with plenty of dining, historical and cultural options.

https://www.nytimes.com/2024/12/18/travel/21hours-venice-box.html

Graphic

 
This article appeared in print on page C8.