Hands stuffed into empty pockets, Ali Adiguzel stood in the cold dusk, waiting for the muezzin's call and a free meal. 
     Like tens of thousands of urban Turks, he is unemployed. Mr. Adiguzel, a 32-year-old Ankara man, arrived here a month ago in search of work. Today he had come, along with about 2,000 other people, to a large tent in the city's main square, Taksim, to break his Ramadan fast. Private donations, customary during the holy month, paid for this evening's supper: soup, rice, vegetables, a four-inch hunk of bread. 
 "I don't feel happy about being here now," Mr. Adiguzel said. "I'm a young man. I'm healthy. I'm strong. I should be able to work." 
Every year during the Muslim holy month, which ends here on Sunday, the rich feed the poor at public tents like this one. But lines are twice as long at this tent this year, organizers say, echoing similar reports from other tents handing out the free meals. Demand for food packages has also risen.
The economic crisis that began in February has altered the social fabric of this city in many ways. Gasoline has become so unaffordable for many that traffic is noticeably lighter. Window bars have gone up to stave off thieves. A new brand of drive-by purse snatchings has shaken residents' sense of safety. 
Turkey, one of the United States' strongest allies in the Islamic world, is in the throes of what is widely regarded as the worst economic crisis in its modern history.
There is little confidence in the coalition government. Islamist political parties currently banned by the ruling elite in their striving to preserve modern Turkey's secular state are still important players because of the support they have traditionally enjoyed from the urban poor, whose ranks are now swelling.
Today, the International Monetary Fund announced that it had reached what it called an agreement in principle on a $10 billion package for Turkey, if the government carried out certain reforms. The new package would come on top of an existing $19 billion bailout from the fund.
On Wednesday, the Turkish Parliament passed a budget with tight spending limits designed to comply in advance with the fund's demands.
In some quarters, the I.M.F. aid is seen as a reward for support of the American-led war in Afghanistan. (Turkey was the first Muslim-majority nation to offer troops.)
"Sept. 11 was a blessing for Turkey," said Mensur Akgun, an international relations professor at Kultur University in Istanbul. "We were luckier than Argentina," he added, referring to that nation's efforts to stave off default on its much larger debt, and the fund's refusal so far to extend extra loans.
Others are less cynical, noting that Turkey, which fought armed insurgents of the Kurdish minority for 15 years until a cease-fire in 1999, has its own reasons to join the fight against terrorism.
"Of course we wanted support in the I.M.F. or wherever," said Cem Duna, a former diplomat who is now an investment consultant. "But our own efforts to combat terrorism were no less an element than anything else." 
For their part, I.M.F. officials have said the loan package had nothing to do with Turkey's new geopolitical role. 
Word of the I.M.F. loan has lifted the Turkish lira for the first time in months. Over the past year, the currency has lost approximately half its value against the dollar, and today stood at about 1,470,000 to the dollar. Inflation is in the high double digits, the economy is expected to shrink 8.5 percent this year, and per-capita annual income hovers around $2,200, the lowest since 1994.
The general aversion to air travel since the Sept. 11 attacks only sharpened the economic crunch by hitting tourism, one of few sectors that was still relatively flourishing.
In the working-class Istanbul district of Zeytinburnu the other day, Nevin Yakupoglu snaked through the narrow rain-soaked streets, trolling for the neediest of families.
As a volunteer with the municipal government's Ramadan charity program, Ms. Yakupoglu had in the trunk of her car sealed cardboard boxes of Ramadan aid: cans of tomato sauce, rice, a jar of marmalade, a big tin of olive oil.
In Hatice Cil's home, a two-room shanty built illegally years ago, Ms. Yakupoglu heard a familiar story. Mrs. Cil, 27, said her husband sold grilled liver on the street. Nowadays, business is so meager that the couple and their two small children barely survive. The landlord is owed a year's rent. They were behind on their bills. Yes, she said, they were all eating. But fruit was a luxury, and only for the children.
This year, what has surprised Ms. Yakupoglu most, she said, are the reluctant calls for help from ordinary working families -- people with jobs, education and ambition, unaccustomed to seeking charity. "It's a frightening thing to see," Ms. Yakupoglu said. 
Zeki Mergen, 27, a father of three who was standing in line at the tent in Taksim Square, waited with his TV-dinner tray in hand. He has a job, but the 250 million liras he earns each month as a construction worker -- roughly $180 -- is not nearly enough to cover basic expenses. "Each day is getting worse," Mr. Mergen said. "We miss yesterday."

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
Photo: In Taksim Square in Istanbul, the needy, whose ranks are growing, get free meals to break the Ramadan fast. (Staton R. Winter for The New York Times)