ANKARA, Turkey -- In a park here, by day, demonstrators occupied an island of bedrolls and blankets. In the evenings, residents banged kitchen pots to sound a persistent note of dissent. And around midnight in Turkey's normally staid capital, riot police officers beat back chanting protesters with pepper spray and tear gas.
After weeks of unrest, the confrontations have subsided in Istanbul, where antigovernment protests started last month in opposition to the planned destruction of a park. The crisis has shifted to Ankara, the seat of the government's power and, to a great extent, the object of protesters' rage.
In state buildings, Turkish officials reacted defensively to criticism of the manner in which they had handled the unrest. On the streets here, protesters alleged that the harsh treatment endured at the hands of officers served to defend the interests of the state. As the government and its opponents planned their next moves, the turmoil reinforced the reputation of a city frequently denigrated as Turkey's undeserving capital.
''Ankara always had a negative meaning,'' said Dogu Ergil, a professor of political science who lives here and teaches part time in Istanbul. ''Ankara means the state versus the people,'' he said.
Pessimism here deepened this week as German officials who had criticized Turkey's crackdown indicated that they were halting the Turkish government's long effort to win membership for the country in the European Union, an alarming prospect for supporters of the pact here. The diplomatic crisis escalated on Friday, as Germany and Turkey summoned each other's diplomatic envoys to complain after a week of bitter recriminations.
Like protests in other parts of Turkey, the demonstrations in Ankara merged local grievances with broader complaints. Protesters criticized the local municipality for its planning choices, including a relentless enthusiasm for building roads, and lashed out at Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan with the frequently repeated charge that his manner was becoming authoritarian.
Many protesters said that while the news media was focused on Istanbul, the police response in Ankara was as harsh, and perhaps more unrelenting. At least three protesters and one police officer were killed during the unrest. Several protesters remain in critical condition.
The government's critics accused it of dealing harshly with protesters because their grievances had struck too close to home. In Kugulu, or Swan Park, where protesters held a sit-in, one young woman said the daily treatment by the police had served as a warning: marching on Parliament or the headquarters of Mr. Erdogan's Justice and Development Party, known by its Turkish initials as A.K.P., ''would be suicide.''
Emine Ulker Tarhan, a former judge and a member of the opposition Republican People's Party who supported the protesters, said the government considered the demonstrations here, in a city filled with civil servants, ''more politicized.''
''This could be why we felt police brutality more than anyone else,'' she said.
No one seemed sure how much broader sympathy there was in Ankara for the protests. People looked for clues in the mysterious pot-banging sessions, speculating about the band of angry citizens that might be responsible.
Some said the noisemakers included doormen, perhaps championing working-class complaints about the government's economic policies.
Others suspected that the city's bureaucrats, forbidden from attending protests, were registering displeasure from their homes.
Volkan Bozkir, a member of Parliament from Mr. Erdogan's party and the chairman of the foreign affairs committee, said he thought that all the talk about a cookware insurrection was an ''urban myth.''
Mr. Bozkir said that while in Istanbul officials had mishandled the original protests, outsiders, including the international news media, had made matters worse. Some television stations, he said, had covered the Istanbul protests ''as if the U.S. was invading Iraq.''
Protesters who complained about Ankara's local government had ignored how far the city had come since the days when it was choked with smog and short of water, Mr. Bozkir said. He also defended Mr. Erdogan's handling of the crisis.
''You can't show a weak hand,'' he said, or Turkey would become ungovernable. ''You can't say the police won't intervene at all.''
In Swan Park, protesters were looking for better ways to resist. ''It's physically exhausting being gassed night after night,'' one young woman said.
The fatigue did not seem to help the police officers' behavior either, she said. ''The shape of the protest has to change.''

http://www.nytimes.com/2013/06/22/world/europe/turkish-capital-heats-up-as-protests-subside-in-istanbul.html