TITLE: Dan Ugaste Dan Ugaste
TOPIC: Crime
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-10-18 00:00:00
SECTION: NEIGHBOR; Pg. 1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Election', 'Indebtedness', 'Crime']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
Bio Party: Republican Office Sought: Illinois House District 65 City: Geneva Age: 60 Occupation: State representative Previous offices held: Current District 65 representative How should the state respond to the influx of migrants bused here from Southern states? The state must demand that the U.S. Government take control of this situation. The request should come from all state, local and federal officials. First, the request should be for the Biden Administration to do its job at the border. 
Next, it should be to provide funds for those people it allows in the country. Illinois should not be required pay more than its share of the 50 states. Illinoisans should not pay over a billion dollars, as it has for the last 3 years, while many other states pay nothing or next to nothing. Illinois cannot afford it, which is one of the reasons why it raised taxes almost a billion dollars this year. Finally, we should repeal the TRUST Act as soon as possible. Are you satisfied with the state's existing ethics policies for senators and representatives? If so, what about the policies should reassure Illinoisans that elected leaders abide by high standards? If not, what changes need to be made? The General Assembly needs to pass more stringent ethical standards; I am not satisfied with the current laws. Illinois needs: • A definition for conflicts of interest and better restrictions on recusals. • A stronger Legislative Inspector General; one with the ability to start investigations and issue subpoena: • To restrict legislators from lobbying for 2-3 full years after leaving office. • Create an independent way to draw the legislative map after the census. The current system allows legislators to pick their voters, instead of voters choosing their legislators, which creates a system with less accountability. Would you support a requirement that election petitions include a line asking candidates for their campaign email address? Yes. I have always done it. This allows a voter to directly interact with the candidates and ask any questions they may have, as it is impossible for candidates to have contact with every voter in their district/represented area. (Direct interaction is also why I try to get to as many doors as possible during an election cycle.) How well do you think criminal justice reforms made in recent years are working? What, if any, changes need to be made? Overall they are not working well but some are working very well. I support law enforcement wearing body cameras, drug courts, better training and while I supported the need for changes to the pretrial system, the complete elimination of cash bail was wrong. In fact, I have a bill that would have accomplished the advocates stated goals and yet would have kept cash bail. We also need to make changes to the laws which do not allow our law enforcement officers to do their job properly and have demoralized many in the profession. I also believe that for any criminal justice reform the state mandates, it should pay for whatever is mandated. We now have an assault weapons ban in Illinois. What if any changes should be made to the law? What more can be done to improve gun safety? I am an advocate for firearm safety. I believe in keeping firearms out of the hands of those who should not possess them, including those individuals who are experiencing mental health issues. Finally, I believe in supporting the United States Constitution, which includes the Second Amendment. As such, commenting on changes to Illinois law are premature at this time given the pending litigation making its way through the federal court system. Illinois is the only state in the nation that mandates regular behind-the-wheel tests for senior drivers. Do you support any changes? I am an early sponsor of House Bill 4431, which would remove the yearly requirement. The data does not support that our current law makes our roads safer. What personal qualifications do you bring that would make you an effective legislator? I have lived in Illinois my entire life. I was raised in a working-class family, worked my way through college and law school and eventually owned a business. I understand there are two sides to every issue. I am willing to, and have shown I will, listen to others to come up with the best policies. I have, and will continue to, work with everyone. Most of all, I understand things must be viewed through a broad perspective. Whether you support all of the laws and policies that are currently in place in our state, some of these laws and policies are harming our state and putting our residents at a disadvantage. We must lower taxes, cut regulation, lower litigation costs, improve educational opportunities and create safe communities. If we do, Illinois can start leading the nation again.

Graphic

 
Dan Ugaste , running for 65th District Representative