TITLE: VOICES: We need to invest in long-term solutions to address what we're seeing at the libraries
TOPIC: Crime
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-10-31 00:00:00
SECTION: IDEAS VOICES
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Education', 'Crime']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
I want to address the recent incidents at our cherished Dayton Metro Libraries, particularly at the Downtown and Southeast Branches. These libraries have long been more than buildings with books; they are safe spaces, pillars of learning, and hubs for community connection and reflection. However, recent incidents have reminded us that when the foundation of home, where values, morals, and character are supported to be taught, becomes weakened or eradicated, these disruptions find their way into our shared spaces and are no longer safe. If we are honest, much of what we witness today reflects what has gone missing from homes and communities for many years.
The issues we are grappling with today have been a long time in the making. Let's take a step back to the 1990s when Dayton Public Schools had to start transporting charter school students. This placed a significant burden on DPS, limiting what they could offer their students, such as after-school bussing to recreational centers, etc. But few wanted to address the strain back then, just as few seem uncomfortable addressing it now. I witnessed these challenges firsthand when I became part of the school choice movement in 2000 when I started my career at Parents Advancing Choice in Education/PACE as the Program Manager. At that time, Dayton Public Schools struggled to meet even basic performance benchmarks, and families  especially those from low-income and working-class backgrounds  were frustrated and desperate for alternatives. PACE was a response to the growing demand for better educational opportunities, a movement born out of the desire to give parents the power to choose schools that aligned with their hopes for their children's future. It wasn't just about education, though; it was about restoring a sense of dignity and control to families who had grown tired of settling for underperforming schools. 
Fast-forward to 2024, and we are witnessing the results of three generations of students who have grown up with fewer spiritual influences, less discipline, and more exposure to social challenges that many of us couldn't have imagined back then. As we all know, the COVID-19 pandemic only added layers of difficulty, exacerbating issues already present  such as disengagement, emotional instability, and weakened community ties. 
The real question is, what are we collectively prepared to do right now to address these challenges? It's not just about talking or holding meetings but about committing to actions that will bring about real, measurable change. What steps can we take today to begin dismantling these cycles of frustration and disappointment? 
I am glad to witness that critical key players like Dayton Metro Library, Dayton Public Schools, Dayton Police Dept, and our community leaders are coming together to address these issues. But we must learn to be proactive and not reactive. This collaboration is a positive step, but it is only the beginning. We will remain trapped until we confront the systemic barriers and rethink how funding is distributed, moving away from temporary fixes to sustainable solutions. Our politicians and leaders must be willing to examine policies that dictate where resources go and who benefits from them. It is not enough to shift dollars around from one program to another; we need to invest in real change. That is why programs like Omega CDC and Pre-School Promise exist (just to name a few). 
Dayton Public Schools with Superintendent David Lawrence, Dayton Police Major Jason Hall, Dayton Metro Library Deputy Director Rachel Gut, and others met with the community on Oct. 22 to continue to discuss the safety of our libraries and students. We all agreed to be apart of the solutions as it relates to all the fights at Southeast and Downtown Branches. After attending the meeting, I could tell there were mixed emotions and some "agree to disagree" moments, however the community was positive knowing the solutions could not be resolved in one night. The fact that the room was packed indicated that people care about our libraries! 
I sincerely pray that together, we will be guided by the understanding that we cannot fix these issues with quick solutions. We need and must have bold, faith-filled action and commitment from every sector of our community - families, schools, sororities, fraternities, government, businesses, colleges, etc. We have a real opportunity to create the kind of permanent change that will restore hope, love, stability, and growth. We need you not just for today, but for generations to come. 
Daria Dillard Stone is the Founding CEO of Sharing Ministries and Parent Engagement Liaison for Dayton Metro Library. She is also an Ordained Minister and the curriculum developer of the S.T.A.R. (Smart Talentented Awesome Respected) Program. In 2024, she received the Dayton Skyscraper Award and the YWCA Dayton "Women of Influence" award in 2018. 
About the Author 
Daria Dillard Stone

Graphic

 
Rev. Daria Dillard Stone is an educational consultant and Parent Engagement Liaison at Dayton Metro Library. (CONTRIBUTED)