TITLE: THE REPUBLICAN PARTY HAS GIVEN UP ON PEOPLE LIKE ME
TOPIC: Religion
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-07-21 00:00:00
SECTION: FORUM; Pg. D-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX

BODY:
Since I was a teenager, I've loved political conventions. Even with all the spontaneity scrubbed, there's still a hint of the old stagecraft and occasional off-script moment to make it feel like history. Conventions are still the biggest stage for political leaders to say something that matters.
Fake? In some obvious ways, yes. But it's one of a handful of traditions allowing political parties to be something more than a quadrennial business meeting. On rare occasions - maybe once in a generation - there's a moment that changes everything for the party, when it lays aside its tradition and becomes a different party.
The Republican convention may have been one such moment. But for cultural conservatives and pro-lifers like me, it wasn't the right one.
The platform then and now
While most of us were transfixed by the possibility that President Biden might drop out of the race, the Republican National Committee wrapped up a not-so-insignificant overhaul of the party platform.
The new version highlighted the nominee's focus on migration and inflation, but whittled away language about abortion to a single sentence and no major policy objectives. The 743 word long "Protecting Human Life" section of the 2016/2020 platform had declared "we assert the sanctity of human life and affirm that the unborn child has a fundamental right to life which cannot be infringed," and included many pro-life policies.
But it continues, boasting about switching decision-making to the states, not about protecting the unborn. "The States are, therefore, free to pass Laws protecting those Rights. After 51 years, because of us, that power has been given to the States and to a vote of the People. We will oppose Late Term Abortion, while supporting mothers and policies that advance Prenatal Care, access to Birth Control, and IVF (fertility treatments)."
As Republicans in the post-Roe world struggle for a unifying message, Mr. Trump has unilaterally decided abortion is no longer central to the party brand. It's a loser. The new message? Let states decide.
There was no rousing call to extend constitutional protections to pre-born children. No "Human Life Amendment." No "compassionate conservatism" connecting the treatment of the most vulnerable and marginalized with the need to build a culture of life.
According to the New York Times, Trump "wanted the 2024 platform to be his and his alone. He wanted it to be much shorter and simpler - and, in some cases, vaguer."
One target was abortion. "He was especially focused on the language about abortion, which he recognized was a potentially potent issue against him in a general election. He wanted nothing in the platform that would give Democrats an opening to attack him, and he made clear to aides that he was perfectly fine with bucking social conservatives."
In years past, pro-lifers relied on influential activists to agitate the pro-life plank back into the platform. But in 2024, they're gone and Trump removed key pro-life members from the drafting committee.
The battle-tested coalition uniting fiscal conservatives, defense hawks, and pro-life activists has effectively disappeared. Regrettably, mine is a party defined by who and what we are against, not what we're for.
Lincoln and Casey
It could have been different. It once was. In 1860, the Republican Party platform was the matador's red cape to southern slaveholders - a declaration against King Cotton and secessionists that one political party would carry out the unfinished work of the Declaration of Independence.
It read in part: "That we brand the recent re-opening of the African Slave Trade, under the cover of our national flag, aided by perversions of judicial power, as a crime against humanity and a burning shame to our country and age."
Opposing the slavers was the GOP's big idea. Within a short time, Lincoln's Republican Party embraced human dignity and equality as a national idea and rejected the compromised patchwork of free and slave states.
Some battles, like human rights, deserve a national debate. That's the purpose of a party platform - to offer big, "reach for the stars" ideas.
We've seen a major party do what the Republicans have just done. In 1992 the Democrats unveiled the Clinton/Gore "New Democrat" ticket. And they too moved their troublesome family members to the cheap seats.
That included the very popular governor of Pennsylvania, Bob Casey Sr. The DNC banned him from speaking a word of his views on abortion. Nothing in prime time. Nothing from the floor. Nothing.
The Democratic platform had once acknowledged the party "fully recognize[s] the religious and ethical concerns which many Americans have about abortion.'' By 1992, they'd locked shut the window for dissent.
The pro-life views once articulated by the likes of Jesse Jackson, Sargent Shriver, Jimmy Carter, and even a young Ted Kennedy were out of bounds - boundaries never since reconsidered or redrawn. Democrats are now a party with a single voice on abortion.
In 2024, Republican pro-life leaders are being asked to be team players, backing off from the movement's historic call for a national law protecting unborn life. Decisions like this have a way of becoming permanent.
At 18, I registered Republican and won a seat as a precinct committeeman. After college I served on my town's borough council and at 25, in 2000, declared my candidacy for the state legislature - for a blue seat in Armstrong and Indiana counties with a 67% Democratic registration.
Among my most enthusiastic supporters were those working-class Democrats, Casey Democrats who believed their party no longer respected people like them. My victory was a tiny tremor before the mega-quake that would redefine the political map in Western Pennsylvania.
The old principles
I believe in compromise. I believe in taking half-a-loaf over nothing at all. I believe in civil discourse. But my convictions about human rights override my strategic instincts.
Now is the time for my party to reaffirm its principles and values, especially its commitment to the most vulnerable. We don't want to be the Democratic party that excluded some of its best members and most loyal sons. We want to be the Republican party that stood with Lincoln.
Jeff Coleman is a former member of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives and principal of Churchill Strategies: jeff@churchillmedia.org He ran for the Republican nomination for lieutenant governor in 2022.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Gene J. Puskar/Associated Press: Two-term Pennsylvania governor Robert P. Casey, who was denied a speaking slot at the 1992 Democratic convention for his pro-life views.
PHOTO: AP /The Scranton Times: Two-term Pennsylvania governor Robert P. Casey, who was denied a speaking slot at the 1992 Democratic convention for his pro-life views.
PHOTO: Johnson Bachman/The Scranton Times via AP: Two-term Pennsylvania governor Robert P. Casey, who pushed through a health insurance program for children and supported universal health care, and wasn't allowed to speak at the 1992 Democratic National Convention.
PHOTO: Carolyn Kaster/Associated Press: An anti-abortion demonstration in Columbus, Ohio, in October. Ohio senator and vice presidential candidate JD Vance shifted his views on abortion before being picked by Donald Trump.
PHOTO: Nam Y. Huh/Associated Press: Delegates pray during the Republican National Convention in Milwaukee, Wis.
PHOTO: Paul Sancya/Associated Press: Delegates cheer during the Republican National Convention.
PHOTO: Arturo Fernandez/Post-Gazette: Members of the Pennsylvania delegation at the Republican National Convention.
PHOTO: Arturo Fernandez/Post-Gazette: Trump and Vance merchandise available for purchase at the Republican national convention.