TITLE: HARRIS IS A DIVERSITY HIRE. VANCE IS A BAD DIVERSITY HIRE.
TOPIC: Religion
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-08-06 00:00:00
SECTION: OPINION; Pg. A-16
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Election', 'Religion']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
Donald Trump is in a weird place - for a solid week, he did not dictate the discourse. The former president is used to influencing front pages, with liberal and conservative media devoting thousands of inches to his antics.
But since President Joe Biden dropped out of the race for the Oval Office, it's Vice President Harris who has been on the front page of newspapers around the world. The only Republican news has been political self-sabotage by Trump's pick for vice president, JD Vance.
Trump hates not dominating headlines. And so, when invited to be interviewed at the conference for the National Association of Black Journalists last week, Trump did what Trump was always going to do.
Trump's wrong answer
He said things to put him back in the news. He chastised the hosts for being late. He denigrated their workplaces and accomplishments. He compared himself to Abraham Lincoln. And that was the first three minutes.
Trump brought questions about Harris' race into the conversation when asked if Harris was a DEI hire. After spending some excruciating seconds discussing where Harris' ethnic allegiances are, he finally answered with a double "could be."
He should have answered, "yes, obviously." Because every single vice-presidential pick in the history of our country, including his own, has been a DEI hire. Vice-presidential picks are all about nothing but diversity, equity and inclusion.
John F. Kennedy and Lyndon Baines Johnson were not friends. The two men had little in common. Johnson was Southern, Protestant and a relic of a previous generation of Democrats; Kennedy was Northeastern, Catholic and liberal.
When Kennedy needed a running-mate, Johnson fit the bill, despite the protests of many liberals in Kennedy's orbit. Together, the two men created a harmony that would ensure their success on the ballot and "brought in" people in the party who were unsure about Kennedy. The veep has always been about perceived balance.
In contemporary American politics, vice presidents are picked because of the geographic, religious and political diversity they bring to the ticket, in order to ensure equitable representation by including different wings of the same party - diversity, equity and inclusion.
Trump's initial instincts about Vance were right. He's young, a competent orator and a military veteran with Hillbilly credentials - seemingly the opposite of Trump. Vance was also willing to fall on the sword of abject humiliation for Trump, denying and disavowing the politician he used to be (one with conviction) in favor of the man he is now (Trump's man, through and through).
There's a 'but'
But Vance has also proved a tricky choice for the Trump ticket. He's arrogant, looks down on working-class people as much as he pretends to champion them (just read his memoir) and claims to hate elites and higher education while constantly discussing his degree from Yale.
Maybe Trump's issue is that Vance has actually brought more problems than diversity, equity and inclusion to the ticket. He's just another blowhard full of hot air and even worse takes. So much for "bringing people in."
Trump knows that Vance was a bad pick. He knows it because he's already trying to downplay its importance.
Or as he also said in that disastrous NABJ interview, "historically, the vice president, in terms of the election, does not have any impact - I mean, virtually no impact. You have two or three days where there's a lot of commotion as to who - like you're having it on the Democrat side, who it's going to be. And then that dies down, and it's all about the presidential pick. Virtually never has it mattered."
He continued: "Maybe Lyndon Johnson mattered for different reasons than what we're talking about. Not for vote reasons, but for political reasons, other political reasons. But historically, the choice of a vice president makes no difference."
But that's not true. Many of us remember what Sarah Palin did to John McCain's campaign - how she stole focus from anything the presidential candidate did and became the lynchpin of the 2008 election. A bad vice presidential pick can do a lot of damage.
JD Vance is no Lyndon Johnson
Which brings me back to DEI. Diversity, equity and inclusion has never been about elevating someone unqualified. Diversity, equity and inclusion has always been about recognizing the importance of difference in qualified candidates as much as we celebrate the triumph of equality.
And at a time of racial tension in our country, having a mixed-race woman as vice president brought a different perspective to the discussions than only the perspectives of white men. That's not a bad thing. Someone raised on the moon will see space differently than someone who has never left the earth.
Lyndon Johnson helped get Kennedy elected president. And after Kennedy's assassination, he took the reins. Johnson mattered for the same reason that Vance matters: Vance would be only one heartbeat from the presidency.
But JDV is not LBJ, and if the missteps and bad headlines continue, Vance might sink the GOP's chances at winning back the White House. Turns out Vance was the unqualified diversity hire all along.
Adriana E. RamÃrez, author of "Dead Boys," is a columnist and InReview editor for the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette. Find her on X: @zadri.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Charles Rex Arbogast/Associated Press: Republican vice presidential candidate Sen. JD Vance, R-Ohio speaks during the Republican National Convention on July 17, in Milwaukee.