Muhammad Ali is 50 years old today, which surprises me. I never thought he would become middle-aged, certainly not fat and slow and patronized, adored in the way elderly former pin-up girls are adored for evoking a time when we had the hot blood to want to be them or have them. In that dazzling time when his beauty, his skill, his outrageousness, made Ali worshiped and feared, I thought that if he survived the controversies he illuminated, he would become a major actor of our times, an elder, a peacemaker.
I remember the moment I first began to have such grand thoughts. The photograph helps. It was Feb. 26, 1964, the morning after he won the heavyweight championship. His name was still Cassius Clay, although Malcolm X's presence in Miami Beach made credible the rumors that he had joined the Lost-Found Nation of Islam and would soon change his name. He had already brought African-American style back into the world sports arena. But at this morning-after press conference, he was subdued, modest, almost, incredibly, boring. In the picture, many sportswriters are already looking toward the right, where the beaten Sonny Liston was being incredibly amiable.
Clay began to lecture those of us still watching (I am in the lower right quadrant, eyes burning, tie loosened). "In the jungle," he said, "lions are with lions and tigers with tigers and redbirds stay with redbirds and bluebirds with bluebirds. That's human nature, too, to be with your own kind. I don't want to go where I'm not wanted."
Reporters began to argue with Clay, about civil rights and integration and citizenship and the role of the sports idol. Quite suddenly, his voice rose and he said: "I don't have to be what you want me to be. I'm free to be who I want."
That was his mightiest moment, his most influential message, a declaration of independence from traditional SportsWorld values of the athlete as chattel, child, product. The revolution he began has taken its turns, most of them material rather than ideological, but his stands and his persecution were noted and debated and internalized in every schoolyard in America.
He was 22 years old when the photograph was taken. I was 26. Yesterday, I turned 54 and studied my unformed face in the picture. In 1964, I thought Clay was the child and I the man. Yesterday, I thought, that pale boy knows nothing and hasn't a clue to what will happen to Ali. He will write about Ali for years, make his sportswriting career on Ali, and never believe that Ali, like so many others, would not know when to quit boxing, would not grow emotionally, would insulate himself within religion.
And that Muhammad Ali would simply enjoy growing old as Muhammad Ali.
"He is a benign and venerated figure," says Thomas Hauser, author of the incomparable and indispensable "Muhammad Ali, His Life and Times (Simon and Schuster, 1991), "who is assumed to be more damaged than he is. The motor skills are diminished, but the mind is as good as it ever was."
The mind, of course, was superficially quick and bright enough for the sports pages and for middle-class white college students who saw him as a Sixties outlaw, a cross between the Beatles and the Panthers. Many middle-class blacks saw him as an embarrassing loudmouth who put down other blacks, often mocking their facial characteristics and their integrationist dreams. The American establishment was afraid that Ali would talk the black working class out of supporting the Vietnam War. Then, as now, he was Icons-R-Us, a sticker to be slapped on one's own symbolic baggage.
At 50, Ali has more money than most people, not nearly as much as he should have, based on his earnings. He is living with his fourth wife and his ninth child on a farm in Michigan. His longtime business associate, Herbert Muhammad, son of the Nation's founder, frequently steers him around the Mideast raising money for the Muhammad Ali Foundation, whatever that might be. A 10-hour television documentary by a British director has been in the works for several years. More than $7 million in Japanese financing has been spent, and the project is still struggling to fly.
Hauser's book, like its subject, has received more honor abroad than in the United States. It won an award as best sports book of the year in Britain, where it lingered on the best-seller list, and it will be translated into Japanese and Arabic.
Once, Ali said to me, "When you're with me you always got something to write about." I should just be grateful. Muse over old photographs, venerate this benign figure, remember the feelings he evoked, the hope he offered, the fun he shared. He was "the onliest boxer in history people asked questions like a senator." And he always had answers. Happy birthday, Muhammad, you are never far out of my mind. You don't have to be what I want you to be. As if I knew. I am both sad and relieved you never became more important than you were when we were young.

Graphic

 
Photo: Muhammad Ali, then known as Cassius Clay, delivering a subdued oration the morning after he knocked out Sonny Liston in Miami Beach. Some of the sportwriters were not even listening to him. (UPI/Bettmann Newsphotos)