When Frankie Garriga talks about what the Morris Park Boxing Club has meant to him, he takes on the air of Marlon Brando's slightly punchy Terry Malloy in ''On the Waterfront.'' Boxing, he hopes, will make him a somebody. 
  ''A lot of people show me a lot of respect because I'm a Golden Gloves champion,'' said Mr. Garriga, a wiry 21-year-old who trained at the club for his 2008 title in the 119-pound novice division. ''People ask about it. They want to hear about it. They want to see you in the gym. They want to see you do better.''
  The 2010 Golden Gloves tournament started Jan. 20 and will culminate in championship bouts at Madison Square Garden at the end of March. But it is a strangely unmoored time for Mr. Garriga. The reason: just before Christmas, a fire gutted the Morris Park Boxing Club, turning it into a moonscape of charred ropes, punching bags and mats, with six heavy bags stretched on the blackened floor like corpses. 
  The other day, Mr. Garriga and two other regulars, along with Dex Pejcinovic, the gym's owner for the past three years, walked  around the ruin. The light filtering through a punctured ceiling lent the once-lively boxing ring a noirish cast. 
  ''This was our home right here,'' Mr. Pejcinovic said. 
  Mr. Garriga, who sparred at the gym almost every day, said his girlfriend called him about the fire around 7 a.m. on Dec. 23. He ran a mile to the gym at 644 Morris Park Avenue and saw eight fire trucks gathered in front, its wall cartoon of two tangled boxers suddenly looking incongruous. 
  ''I was thinking, where am I going to train,'' said Mr. Garriga. ''That's the gym I'm known from. I represent Morris Park.'' 
  And when it comes to boxing, Morris Park is no ordinary neighborhood. The club is linked with professionals like Aaron ''Superman'' Davis, World Boxing Association welterweight champion in 1990, and Lou Del Valle, who became light heavyweight champion in 1997. Their feats inspired local young men -- and a few women -- to begin their own boxing careers. But with the fire occurring just a month before the start of the Golden Gloves, the two dozen club members scheduled to compete in that tournament had to hurry  to find other gyms, with most ending up at John's Gym three miles away, near 149th Street.
  Mr. Garriga, known as Speedy, said that since the fire he had been able to train only every other day or so. ''I have to take a bus and a train, and sometimes I don't have the money,'' he said. ''When I used to go to Morris Park, I just walked.'' He worried that his performance would not have the same edge, so just as the Golden Gloves began he got a job in a laundry to earn money for carfare. 
  There was a time when every working-class neighborhood had a boxing club, usually harshly lighted and reeking of cigar smoke. But skyrocketing insurance costs, high rents and a decline in professional matches have shrunk the number to perhaps a half dozen, according to Bruce Silverglade, who owns Gleason's Gym in Downtown Brooklyn. That has meant the loss of an outlet that rescued many youngsters from other diversions. 
  Mr. Pejcinovic, a 40-year-old Yugoslavian immigrant and father of two, said boxing saved him from a life of drugs and petty crime. He spent two years in prison for assault -- and when he was released in 1991 he started boxing as an amateur and then fought six times as a professional, in arenas like the Taj Mahal in Atlantic City, though the last bout ended in disappointment. ''I'm beating the guy and then I get tired and he's like he just started the first round,'' Mr. Pejcinovic said, faulting himself for not having trained harder. ''The guy caught me with a cheap right hand and dropped me.'' 
  He still dreams of a comeback. But he is glad that by running the gym he has been able to steer local youngsters into disciplined lives.
  Mr. Pejcinovic, who rocks when he walks, in a classic boxer's gait, has plans to rebuild. He estimates that he must raise $50,000 to do so, because he had no insurance for the fixtures in the gym, though the landlord -- also a former boxer -- had insured the building itself. Mr. Pejcinovic said he had received a $10,000 pledge from Everlast, the boxing equipment company. 
  Mr. Pejcinovic made most of his income at the Morris Park Club through membership fees, which cost $50 a month. But he let many poor youngsters train for free, said one of his trainers, Victor Pena, 67. 
  Orland Ortiz, 23, is one young man who made the club his home. ''When all my friends were smoking weed, drinking, doing drugs, I was in the gym doing something positive for myself,'' said Mr. Ortiz, who has been boxing at the club since he was 15. 
  At 151 pounds, Mr. Ortiz has reached the Golden Gloves semifinals four years in a row, although he has not yet come home with the brass glove dangling from his neck, as Mr. Garriga did. But what draws him to boxing, he said, is ''just the rush when I get into the ring.''
  ''You being the center of attention, you being able to perform in front of your friends and family and show them what you can do,'' he said. ''In boxing it's life and death. It's no team. You can't count on anybody. You put everything on the line.'' 

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: Inside the Morris Park Boxing Club, which a fire gutted in December, are, from left, Victor Pena, a trainer
the Golden Gloves boxers Orland Ortiz and Frankie Garriga
 and Dex Pejcinovic, the gym's owner. Mr. Pejcinovic said, ''This was our home right here.'' (PHOTOGRAPHS BY ANGEL FRANCO/THE NEW YORK TIMES)