"TALL, graceful." That was the impression left on Venus Williams by Arthur Ashe, five years ago when she was 12 and Ashe was three weeks removed from telling the world that he had AIDS.
Venus Williams was quite the beaded-braided vision herself yesterday in the new tennis stadium named for Ashe, especially when her footwork was right and she could propel the full force of her 6-foot-1 1/2-inch frame and 137 pounds into the ball. After stumbling around in her first set against Larisa Neiland of Latvia, Williams was everything she's been advertised as for several years now. She was Arther Ashe's vision, tennis's untapped resource, the great urban athlete crashing the coveted country club.
Hours before the Mayorless ceremony honoring Ashe, and an emotional parade of former champions, Williams's unveiling at the United States Open became a one-sided flurry of groundstroking furor. She won 12 of the last 13 games, and punctuated her 5-7, 6-0, 6-1 victory with a 119-mile-an-hour ace. Then Williams finished her show of power and day of grace with a nice little touch.
"It was definitely a privilege playing on this court," she said. Amen.
Her first and only meeting with Ashe was at a clinic in Philadelphia, spring of 1992, the word having already spread from Los Angeles of two African-American girls from the inner city who were being groomed by their willful father to be tennis stars. Venus, her sister, Serena, and their father, Richard, took a photo with Ashe.
"I don't remember what he said," Williams said. "I'm sorry."
No apology necessary. "Tall, graceful" was already a far better tribute than the pitiful grandstanding the Mayor of New York City came up with. Knowing Ashe, he would not have been terribly offended by Rudolph W. Giuliani's refusal to attend last night's ceremony as an election-year protest against David M. Dinkins's pro-tennis policies, which helped build Ashe Stadium and create the two-week no-fly zone to which Giuliani objects. Ashe probably would have smiled his it's-all right smile and defended Giuliani's right to mix politics with sport.
But then, Ashe would have also known a hypocrite when he heard one. He might have asked how it was possible that Giuliani could be such the neighborhood advocate in Queens and be so willing to turn the West Side of Manhattan into a giant parking lot. How he could be such a pit bull with tennis people and a puppy on its back with the owner of his favorite baseball team. How he could attack a non-profit organization that built its own stadium -- available for public use -- but cozy up to a man who wants everyone's tax dollars and a break on the rent.
Ashe in tennis once created the same expectation that Tiger Woods has in golf -- that more blacks would follow his lead and integrate the province and playing fields of the rich. But part of Ashe's legacy is that he understood that people of modest means do not simply will their way in. The tennis leagues and clinics in places like Newark were supposed to give inner city kids a place to start. If Giuliani wants a good tennis cause, better he should push the United States Tennis Association to make sure that kids of the city's working class neighborhoods, not just the professionals who motor over from Douglaston and Forest Hills, use the pristine courts around Arthur Ashe Stadium.
There have to be more uncut diamonds in the rough, more Venus Williamses out there. Her mother, Oracene, said her older daughter is not completely comfortable with the feeling that America is waiting on her to be its Black Tennis Star. Venus Williams once even called Althea Gibson, who turned 70 yesterday, for advice. "She's going to have to handle it," Oracene Williams said, "because that's the way it's going to be."
We actually don't know that yet. Though Williams was signing autographs at a corporate booth following her match as if she were a top-ranked star, she has really only been an occasional mystery guest on a tour currently being dominated by a 16-year-old. She doesn't build points very well. She talks of making a full-time commitment in one breath, and of going to college in the next. Her coaching situation is a curious mom-and-pop arrangement, though mom never played tennis and Richard Williams, like the Mayor, was nowhere in sight yesterday.
His daughter did the job, though. This day, Ashe's day, she left a fine impression, as he once did for her.

Graphic

 
Photo: Venus Williams (Vic DeLucia/The New York Times)