NEXT month the Warner Brothers' movie ''American Flyers'' will be opening in this country just as the bicycle race it is patterned after is drawing to a close. Is it a case of life imitating art? Hollywood may be making bike racing larger than life, but there should be enough real drama to surpass that on the movie screen.
American cycling is on the verge of something big. Why else would Bernard Hinault, winner of the Tour de France that concluded last Sunday, choose to leave European competition for a race in America? On the lucrative post-Tour European racing circuit, Hinault could expect to earn $5,000 a day. In America, he will receive only his expenses. In Europe, Hinault cannot walk the streets without the instant recognition accorded a superstar athlete. On the streets of San Francisco, where the Coors International Bicycle Classic begins Aug. 3, Hinault will walk unrecognized.
In Europe, cycling is a sport of and for the working-class. Hinault himself is the son of a railway worker. Farmers, shopkeepers and bankers line the streets of small villages, willing to wait for hours to see the best cyclists in the world pedal by in a blur of speed and color, the tension in the air building as they wait.
Cycling is a sport steeped in tradition in Europe. In America it has a newer, fresher face. The Tour de France is in its 72d running; this is only the 11th Coors Classic. The Tour covers a grueling 2,500 miles in 22 stages; the Classic lasts just 13 stages and covers under 1,000 miles. Racing in America is more show and less grind than in Europe.
Nevertheless, worldwide attention will be focused on the Coors Classic; in something of a subplot, it will feature a match between the professionals and the Eastern bloc amateurs, who have long been regarded as the world's best amateur cyclists. In Europe, top professionals would never race against top amateurs, because a loss to amateurs would attract a great deal more attention than in the United States. Jean-Marie LeBlanc, the premier French cycling journalist, says this event boasts ''the finest pro-am roster he has ever seen.''
In the Classic, Americans have an event that aspires to the greatness of the Tour de France. The simple fact that Hinault has chosen to race in America demonstrates the increase of popularity of bicycle racing in this country. Not since the prewar popularity of the six-day races at Madison Square Garden has the sport enjoyed such popular attention. Cycling is fast and dangerous, like auto racing, yet requires the endurance of the long distance runner. It is extremely colorful and familiar, even if only in a vague way, because everyone has ridden a bike at one time.
The race has ambitiously moved west to California for the first time and will start in San Francisco. Over 16 days the riders will follow a course through California's wine country and across the Sierra Nevada mountains, where it will leap-frog by plane to the western border of Colorado. From Grand Junction, the race will wind through the famous resort towns of Aspen, Vail and Copper Mountain before settling in to the finish in Boulder on Aug. 18.
Hinault's La Vie Claire teammate, Greg LeMond of the United States, the 1983 world professional champion, is a favorite to win. But LeMond must watch out; this race is not suited to his style. True, it is in LeMond's home country, but he has not raced here since he last won the Classic in 1981. The professionals are used to extremely long races that are generally more relaxed at the start, then pick up speed in the last of their seven hour tests. The stages of amateur races are cut-throat and fast right from the start, but only last three to four hours.
What has happened to spark the popularity of bicycle racing in the United States? Corporate sponsorship has injected new life into a physically and financially draining sport. The United States Cycling Federation has received close to $1 million in cash and services from corporations in 1985, almost double that received in 1984. Teams now travel the country in brightly painted vans bearing their sponsors logos.
Why are companies investing more in cycling? Levi Strauss's sports marketing coordinator, Paul Danielsen, says, ''Young adults, many of whom are cyclists, are a target market for us and we have seen that cycling is on the surge in the U.S.'' And where racers once had to turn to Europe to improve, the United States race circuit is challenging enough to attract foreign racers here.
When the Southland Corporation, owners of the 7-Eleven chain, decided to be the cycling venue sponsor for the 1984 Summer Olympics, it became the sport's overnight benefactor. Bright green, red and white 7-Eleven jersies adorn the members of the top United States based professional team, the top amateur team, two junior teams and the best domestic women's team. The company also sponsors two nationwide Grand Prix series, one for the track and one on the road.
Other major United States corporations have also jumped in. In 1984, the Ore-Ida Women's Challenge event was born in Idaho; Nabisco Brands has joined the movement by sponsoring an 18 event series throughout the summer, called the Wheat Thins Mayor's Cup. The United States Cycling Federation contracted to run the events and estimated Nabisco's involvement in running the event at over $2 million.
The Mayor's Cup format is a total departure from European racing in that it is designed to educate the spectator, while providing a dazzling show. The races are fast, 40 lap races on a 1-kilometer loop utilizing prime downtown city streets. On July 19, 15,000 fans turned out in Philadelphia. The final event is scheduled in Boston on Sept. 29, but the race which best epitomizes this new concept will be held Sept. 2 on Rodeo Drive in Beverly Hills, Calif. That's show business.
In a role reversal, American racing is having an impact oversees. The popularity of women's cycling in America caused the Tour de France director Felix Levitan to add a women's event in 1984. This year's champion was a 36-year-old Italian Olympian, Maria Canins, who was the overall women's winner of the 1984 Coors Classic. Another twist was the success of the 7-Eleven pro team in winning two stages of the Giro D'Italia (Italy's Tour) earlier this summer.
Late next summer, the United States will host the 1986 World Championships in Colorado Springs. This is another first for United States racing and also another reason Hinault has chosen to race here next week - to see how his body responds to the heat and high altitude. American racers have always done well in the Coors Classic against top international fields. The 1984 Coors Classic champion, Doug Shapiro, who recently became the third American to ever finish the Tour de France, will return to defend his title. This country loves home-grown champions, and this year's expanded edition of America's biggest and best bicycle race will help interest and understanding in the sport to continue to grow.

Graphic

 
Photo of Connie Carpenter Phinney with Jose Petrocinio (AP; UPI)