We all know breaking up isn't easy to do. It can also be hard
to watch, depending on the circumstances. As the most volatile
of ABC's high-profile Tuesday series continue to evolve -- or,
in Roseanne's case, mutate -- tonight's pivotal episodes
expose their broken hearts for all to see.
It isn't always pretty.
HELL HATH NO FURY: On Roseanne (# # 1/2 out of four, 8
ET/PT), it gets downright ugly when Jackie (Laurie Metcalf) confronts
Dan (John Goodman) over the affair he seems to have had in California
while tending to his mother. After Jackie badgers him to 'fess
up to Roseanne, a bleak and uncompromising bedroom scene begs
the question: Can this marriage be saved?
For those who've long been wondering if this sitcom could be saved
after a gruesomely indulgent first half of the season, it should
be reported that reality, however painful, is a welcome visitor
to the nouveau riche Conner household.
Tonight's chilly scene of winter is easily the best episode yet
in this misbegotten final season, even if it's not one most viewers
would reasonably look forward to enduring. The show has upgraded
from the ranks of truly awful to unpleasant.
Dan's guilt-ridden anguish is palpably portrayed by the invaluable
Goodman, while Metcalf and Roseanne handle the indignant pain
of the wronged woman with characteristic overstatement. Roseanne
gets off some good and astringent barbs, her specialty, but falters
when indulging her self-impressed tendencies. She declares she
won't react to this shock with "the typical response of the numb
society wife . . . I don't have that blindness that only money
can buy."
So only the working class can experience true hurt? Roseanne,
get over yourself.
THE SINGLE GUY: While one might wish for Dan and Roseanne
to get past their crisis, applause is the only reasonable reaction
to Spin City (# # #, 9:30 ET/PT) splitting up Michael J. Fox and
his sensuous squeeze, Carla Gugino. Nothing wrong with the actress,
but her character (an ace reporter with multiple conflicts of
interest) never made sense.
Besides, this show's strength lies in the workplace dynamics,
with the best ensemble of its sort since Murphy Brown's glory
days. Here, Fox's Emmy-worthy display of boyish cynicism gets
free range to collide with a slick array of colleagues, each of
whom rallies in vain to rescue Mike Flaherty (Fox) from his doldrums.
Especially good tonight are Richard Kind's long-suffering office
patsy, Michael Boatman's acerbic gay activist, Connie Britton's
sympathetic romantic displaying her "pity face" and Alexander
Gaberman's naive, lovesick puppy.
This may be Fox's vehicle, but he's hardly driving solo.
ARE THEY BLUE?: Jimmy Smits and Kim Delaney continue their
career-high work as tormented ex-lovers who can't escape each
other on the job or shake each other off duty. Tonight, NYPD Blue
(# # # 1/2, 10 ET/PT) violently resolves the intense triangle
between Bobby Simone (Smits), Diane Russell (Delaney) and Jimmy
Lieri (Christopher Meloni), the seductively sinister crook Russell
has gone perilously undercover to take down.
On the same day he's about to be promoted (with a cameo from real
New York Police Commissioner Howard Safir), Bobby creates an unholy
and unprofessional mess in his desire to protect the woman who
turned down his proposal.
His bloody confrontation with Lieri and subsequent acts that more
than bend the rules of procedure result in a dark climax that
perplexingly occurs off camera. It does, however, cast a shadow
over Bobby's promotion ceremony.
These detectives operate in a universe of murky moral boundaries,
which inevitably includes affairs of the heart. The final fade-out
between Bobby and Diane is fraught with regret, fear and longing.
This isn't just soap opera with a badge.
It's great drama.

Graphic

 
PHOTO, Color, Don Cadette, ABC; PHOTO, Color, Jerry Wolfe, ABC; PHOTO, Color, George Lange, ABC