HOMEROOM ABC, Sunday, 8: 30 p.m. EDT/PDT OVERALL RATING 5.4
 
 Darryl Harper (Darryl Sivad) returns to the inner-city to teach fourth-graders. He and pre-med wife (Penny Johnson) rent from his father-in-law (Bill Cobbs). (Special preview Saturday)
 
 Not one of the stronger shows, our panel said. This was the second worst and the least original of the 12 shows previewed.
''It's an '89 version of Welcome Back, Kotter with black elementary school kids,'' said Carla Buchanan. Others mentioned The Cosby Show and A Different World.
Katherine Kish went so far as to call it a black, male version of Our Miss Brooks.
The show was ''too much cute and too predictable,'' said Karl A. Busam. ''It was not funny,'' said Sue Tilcock.
Almost 90 percent of the panel said the show is somewhat or not at all funny, compared with 11 percent who thought it was very funny.
While many panel members found the pilot disappointing, they found a moral in this story of a young black teacher who returns to the inner-city to teach fourth-graders.
Joan Wing called it ''a situation comedy with some heart.''
Winning the hearts of our panel, however, is the working class Phil (Bill Cobbs), whose daughter Virginia (Penny Johnson) is married to the teacher Darryl Harper (Darryl Sivad). Phil ''rents'' his basement apartment to the couple.
Mary Wilhite was among the many who said the ''girl's father's acting'' was the best thing going on the show.
But panel members said they could not recommend the show over Cosby, Night Court or Roseanne.
Homeroom has an uphill battle ahead. It has no name stars - Sivad is a stand-up comedian - and it follows the critically panned Free Spirit in its Sunday time slot against CBS' Murder, She Wrote and Fox's America's Most Wanted/Totally Hidden Video block.
Thirty-three percent of the panel would watch other episodes, but 41 percent said they would not.
 TEXT OF GRAPHIC
Percentage who'd rather watch 'Homeroom' than: 
Night Court 41%

Notes

Ribbon Label; USA TODAY'S VIEWER PANEL; 8

Graphic

 
color (chart); PHOTO; color, Capital Cities/ABC ( Darryl Sivad)
 
CUTLINE: NEW TEACHER: Darryl Sivad's series scored low on originality.