NEW YORK — As broadcast networks rolled out their plans for next season this past week, those watching could be forgiven for pulling out phones and checking the calendar.
There's the cast of NBC's "Will & Grace," ready to return. The folks at "Roseanne" are back on the couch. "Dynasty" and "S.W.A.T." are coming back with new actors, the latter settling in to a CBS lineup that already boasts "Hawaii Five-0" and "Macgyver." Just a year after its farewell season, "American Idol" will live again.
With cable and streaming services enticing viewers with bold work like "Game of Thrones," "Stranger Things" and "The Handmaid's Tale," broadcasters entered a time machine in a quest to find something appealing.
The reboot of "Roseanne," ABC's hit 1988-97 comedy about a working-class family led by Roseanne Barr, was that network's big surprise.
"The Conners' joys and struggles are as relevant and hilarious today as they were then, and there's really no one better to comment on our modern America than Roseanne," ABC Entertainment President Channing Dungey said.
CW President Mark Pedowitz said it was a "no-brainer" to order a remake of the prime-time soap "Dynasty." Much of the network's target audience hadn't been born when on-screen divas Linda Evans and Joan Collins engaged in catfights, as they were charmingly called back then.
Networks hope the reheated comfort food will appeal to those who remember the original shows as well as newcomers unaware they're not seeing an original concept.
CBS Corp. Chairman Leslie Moonves, who called the "Roseanne" comeback a "stunt" in admiring fashion, suggested too much was being made of the trend.
The final frontier
Networks are wading more deeply into sci-fi and fantasy genres, aping the movie model that finds more reliable success with space and superhero sagas than untested themes. "Marvel's Inhumans" will air on ABC. CW is adding "Black Lightning" to a comic book-heavy schedule that already includes "The Flash" and "Supergirl." Fox will air "The Gifted," a drama about children with mutant powers, and comedy "Ghosted," about pals exploring unexplained phenomena in Los Angeles.
Trump talk
President who? The prime-time broadcast schedules suggest that if you're looking to be reminded of the nation's political drama, you might want to go elsewhere.
"I think what the mood of the country has told us is that television is a little bit of an escape," ABC's Dungey said.