TITLE: At 23, Surviving Scandal to Take a Green Seat in the E.U. Parliament; The Global Profile
TOPIC: Election
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-12-20 00:00:00
SECTION: WORLD; europe
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/1.DOCX

BODY:
Lena Schilling, the youngest lawmaker in Brussels, faced a harsh questioning of her character and credibility before winning a chance to fight against climate change in the halls of power.
Campaigning for a seat in the European Parliament this spring, Lena Schilling was already facing an uphill battle, with her Green Party expected to fare poorly in the election across the continent.
Then came a devastating takedown by a major news media outlet attacking not her policies but her character, with the ensuing controversy possibly making an already difficult situation for the Greens even worse.
On May 7, Der Standard, one of Austria's leading newspapers, published an article stating that Ms. Schilling, a 23-year-old whose climate activism had already given her a prominent national profile, "has a problematic relationship with the truth, plays people off each other and leaves a scorched earth in her wake."
The next morning, Ms. Schilling defended herself at a news conference, saying the accusations had nothing to do "with politics or Europe or the upcoming elections."
The article, which accused Ms. Schilling of spreading damaging rumors about colleagues and friends and manipulating fellow climate activists, generated significant attention in Austria, and powerful defenders and detractors of Ms. Schilling lined up on opposing sides.
Werner Kogler, Austria's vice chancellor and the country's Green Party spokesman, called the article "anonymous murmurs." Austria's president, Alexander Van der Bellen, offered his support.
But the country's tabloids took to calling Ms. Schilling "Lying Lena," and the controversy crossed international borders, with Der Spiegel in Germany giving her the mocking title of "Gossip Girl."
"I wanted to enter politics because I wanted to change how we dealt with climate issues because it's harming millions," Ms. Schilling said in a recent interview. "And instead, we talked a lot about my private life and things that shouldn't be in public."
Ms. Schilling publicly apologized for some of the accusations that Der Standard published in a series of articles but denied others, like that she had ever considered abandoning the Greens.
The revelations were personally painful and politically damaging.
"After the scandal, what was left was a real question about the sincerity and trustworthiness of Lena Schilling as a candidate," said Jakob-Moritz Eberl, an election researcher at the University of Vienna.
But by June, after withstanding weeks of withering scrutiny, Ms. Schilling enjoyed some good news.
The Austrian Press Council determined that Der Standard had violated "the code of honor" with its overuse of anonymous quotes.
And Ms. Schilling was one of the two Green Party members in Austria to secure a seat in the election, and she was sworn in as the youngest member of the current European Parliament.
The media uproar was her first major challenge as a politician, but as a young female lawmaker, she expects more to come.
"I find that even in 2024, many people won't take you seriously because of your gender or age," Ms. Schilling said. "I want to show people they're wrong."
To some observers, her youth and gender played a significant role in the attacks from the tabloids.
"This intersection of her being a woman and being very young, it's kind of new for people in Austria," said Sophie Lecheler, a communications professor at the University of Vienna, who added that there "wasn't a clear playbook" for such a candidate. She described the news coverage overall as "chaotic, impulsive and quite emotional."
Ms. Schilling's parents took her to her first protest when she was a toddler. They were in their early 20s when she was born and raised her in a "very loose" way, she said. "They were always like, 'You can do it, just try it.' Sometimes it went well and sometimes it didn't."
In the working-class district in Vienna where she grew up, people had other concerns besides the climate, Ms. Schilling said, and her "political thoughts were not that welcome." Eventually, as a teenager, she found her place among the city's climate activists.
In March 2019, months before she began studying toward a bachelor's degree in political science at the University of Vienna, she had her coming out as a movement leader when she gave a speech during the first worldwide Fridays for Future strike, in which students left classrooms to demand action on climate change.
The night before, the prospect of speaking before a large crowd in Vienna was making her feel ill. "I was sitting at home, shaking," she said.
Before going to bed, she checked her phone and saw that student protesters were already on the streets in Australia. Her anxiety was replaced by inspiration.
"In 150 countries, there are a million young people who feel the same as me, and that was one of those lightning moments," she said.
Two and a half years later, she and other young activists occupied a construction site on the edge of a nature reserve outside Vienna, where the government was planning to build a highway tunnel. Ms. Schilling became a spokeswoman.
A few months into the protest, Austria's environment minister, Leonore Gewessler, a Green Party politician, called off the project.
"I saw that strong women in politics can make a change," Ms. Schilling said. "People like her who fight for climate justice do it for decades, and then, suddenly, she was in a position to make this decision."
Last year, Ms. Schilling, who has paused her pursuit of a degree, began writing a column in a widely read Austrian newspaper, and this February the Green Party announced she would be their top candidate for the European Parliament, making her the face of their campaign.
Then came the exposé of her personal life.
Der Standard reported that Ms. Schilling had been sued by a former friend and her friend's husband for supposedly telling people that he had physically abused his wife. The two sides reached an agreement in October, with Ms. Schilling promising to correct the record about the couple, and the suit was dropped.
The newspaper also contended that Ms. Schilling had invented a relationship with a TV journalist, who later demanded and got a notarized statement from Ms. Schilling that they did not know each other personally.
After the scandal, there were those who wondered if the Greens would have fared better with a less contentious, more experienced lead candidate, and one who had been better vetted.
"How could a scandal like that not have been on their radar?" said Mr. Eberl, the election researcher.
Mr. Eberl noted that Thomas Waitz, the secondary candidate for the Greens, had received nearly double the votes Ms. Schilling had secured.
Ms. Schilling concedes her behavior was far from flawless.
"I made mistakes in my personal life," she said. "I totally did. I'm a young person. I apologized for those mistakes, and I took responsibility."
Now that she has taken her parliamentary seat, Ms. Schilling sees her five-year term as a chance to prove she is a trustworthy politician for whom the climate crisis is an absolute priority.
On a cloudy September morning in Brussels, where the European Parliament meets, Ms. Schilling returned to her office after early meetings and, with obvious relief, sipped the day's first coffee from a pink mug that read "Green Feminist." Despite having moved to Brussels two months earlier, Ms. Schilling hadn't yet found time to buy a coffee machine for her apartment — or a bed.
"I'm not here for my personal comfort," she said.
As a member of the Greens, Ms. Schilling has her legislative work cut out for her. Compared with 2019, when the Green Party triumphed in the European parliamentary elections with its best showing ever, the atmosphere now is much less optimistic. After losing one-quarter of their seats this June, the Greens are leaning into a strategy of compromise and pragmatism.
"In surveys, people care about the climate crisis, but other things in the moment are more important, and I get that," Ms. Schilling said. "There are so many fears right now," she added, listing not just the climate crisis, but Russia's war with Ukraine and inflation.
With the campaign turbulence behind her, Ms. Schilling said she was now focused on stopping the world from burning.
"Politics isn't about your personal feelings," she said. "Politics is about fighting for the best livelihood for the most people. You're the fighter, but your personal emotions shouldn't be that relevant. The cause leads the way."
PHOTO: Lena Schilling speaking at the European Parliament in September. At 23, she is the youngest lawmaker in the legislative body. (PHOTOGRAPH BY Hans Lucas, via Reuters FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)