TO this day it is hard for me to speak about possessing any real sense of a home, at least during my childhood and adolescence. Or, to put this idea more precisely: whatever sense of a secure home life, of belonging, that I once felt as a boy was whisked out from under my feet at a tender age.
I was born in the summer of 1951 in Manhattan, at Woman's Hospital in Harlem, the first four years of my life passing serenely in our ground-floor walk-through on West 118th Street, where my parents, fresh up from Cuba, had settled in the mid-1940s. What few and primitive memories I have from those years are of a busy and boisterous household, with relatives and newly arrived boarders constantly filling the spare beds and cots we kept in a back room; and of crawling along the floors during the many weekend parties that my papi, a spendthrift Cubano to the core, often gave. On such occasions, our living room, facing the street, became a cozy, if smoke-filled, dance hall, replete with dim lights, music, food and booze -- fetes that attracted Cubans and other Latinos to our home from every part of the city.
These were family affairs, with folks of every age, from old abuelitas, or grandmothers, to mothers with newborns. As songs like ''The Peanut Vendor'' by the Cugat orchestra gushed out of the record player, and people ate plates of arroz con pollo with tostones or some crispy lechon, others -- mostly young couples in love, like Frankie the exterminator and his fiancee -- took to the dance floor and mamboed away.
On one of those nights, I recall, people rushed to look out the window, pointing with excitement: some kind of crazy and haunted sound had drawn them there. My father lifted me up to see the most amusing thing in the world. There, a local man, celebrating his roots, had dressed up in kilt and tam-o'-shanter and had gone marching along the street, playing old Celtic airs on his bagpipes. So this was America!
Our festive apartment was a Cuban oasis in a largely non-Latino block of working-class folks and Columbia University students. My family surely stood apart from our fellow tenants. Neighbors like Mrs. Blair, the elderly and genteel woman living directly across the hall, and Mr. Hess, our German superintendent, did not know any Spanish and were surely bemused by having a little slice of Cuba in their midst.
While my father went off to his job as a morning-to-lunch shift cook at the Biltmore Hotel, it was my mother who cared for me: occasionally she'd wheel my stroller over to the nearby Columbia University campus, by whose fountains we would sit, or down the hill to Morningside Drive with its ivied walls looking eastward over the rooftops of Harlem. Just as often we stayed in the apartment, surrounded by our relatives and guests, our kitchen, with sizzling pans of food, always the busiest place.
But wherever we happened to be, Spanish, rather than English, is what I heard day in and day out. It was, after all, my mother and father's tongue -- for years my mother resisted learning more than a handful of English phrases -- and it was the language that I identified with the comforts and security of home.
That is, until something inside me changed.
In the summer of 1955, my mother took me to Cuba for three months, to visit with her family in Holguin, on the rural eastern part of the island. At the end of my Cuban sojourn, I fell deathly ill from a disease of los rinones -- the kidneys -- a bout of nephritis so severe that, back in the States, I spent a year or so recovering in a hospital in Greenwich, Conn., the black hole of my childhood.
It was during that long separation from my family that I became estranged from the Spanish language and, therefore, my roots. I recall returning home from the hospital to the apartment and being only vaguely aware of just who my father, mother and older brother were; and Spanish, the language I had so glibly spoken not so long before, suddenly seemed like a foreign tongue. To my mother's chagrin, I had seemingly lost interest in Spanish, or perhaps forgotten how to speak the language. It was English, which I had absorbed during my hospital stay, that I came to prefer.
The apartment itself, with its sizzling radiators and leaky pipes, and with my souvenir conga drum from Cuba still in my room, seemed vaguely familiar and therefore somewhat comforting. Visitors like Mr. Martinez, a superintendent from up the street, or the deaf and mute Mrs. Walker, with whom my mother somehow had fluent conversations in grunts and gesticulations, were always nice to me. ''This is my son, who almost died,'' my mother would tell them.
But because of my disengagement from Spanish and my frail health, the apartment became something of a prison. I was still considered quite susceptible to infections; as a result, for several years I rarely left home, except when I had an appointment for a checkup. My most frequent companion was my mother, who had begun to regard me, her muy americano son, with increasing exasperation -- ''Por favor, por que no hablas espanol?'' ''Why don't you speak in Spanish?'' I had more than a few problems communicating with her, and I began to experience a stranger's solitude.
I, a kid, had become an outsider within my own home.
At this point I should mention another thing: unlike my mother and father, who were dark-featured, I was fair-skinned, blond, hazel-eyed, my looks a throwback to a distant Irish ancestor. That I was so different in appearance from my own parents was something I could see in my mother's eyes, as if, indeed, the son who refused to speak Spanish truly belonged in another household. (Or at least that's my fantasy of how she sometimes saw me.)
Surely then you can imagine how cooped up and lonely I felt. In those years, poised by our living room windows, and unable to play with any friends, I spent many an hour watching the street, where life, in a quite New York way, merrily unfolded. Mainly I envied those kids who were free to do as they pleased, whether it was cussing their brains out while playing cards for cigarettes on our stoop, singing doo-wop or gleefully stomping on the hoods of cars in the midst of a catch during a three-sewer stickball game. The sight of beautiful snow falling, youngsters with their sleds trailing behind them, making their way to Morningside Park, where they would zip down the steepest ice-covered stairways with abandon -- it all left me faint-headed with hopes of my own.
In the meantime, before I attended school, my mother became my teacher -- not in Spanish, but in English, which she could barely read herself. Spending part of nearly every day by our kitchen table with comic books open before us, we took turns reciting each word aloud: after a while, it was I who corrected her pronunciation. In a tender way, as I think about it now, those afternoons were our most peaceful and unhurried moments -- and well worth it, even if my Spanish remained unchanged.
Of course, I got better, grew up and eventually left the strict confinement of my household for the outside world. Not that I easily fit in -- I always had a solitary air about me -- but I made my friends, among them many Latinos.
Then, as the years passed, while learning the hard way that I did not completely fit in with either group, a funny thing happened to me. Despite the strange baggage that I carried about my upbringing, and despite the relative loss of my first language, I eventually came to the point that, when I heard Spanish, I found my heart warming. And that was the moment when I began to look through another window, not out onto 118th Street, but into myself -- through my writing, the process by which, for all my earlier alienation, I had finally returned home.

http://www.nytimes.com

Graphic

 
PHOTOS: GOOD DAYS: The fair-haired author, above, with his mother and older brother on a Manhattan sidewalk and, at left, about age 7. A Cuban flag sits on the TV.