I always had unwavering confidence in my mind, my work ethic, and my ambition. But having a child made that certainty slip out of my hands.
I grew up in a dysfunctional household because my father was an alcoholic, and when I was young, I would lie in my twin bed next to the window and write out the life I planned to lead when I grew up and gained control. I still have the battered, sunshine-colored notebook in which I plotted my future. 
  Our family was working class. We had no wealth and no family connections to open doors, but the one advantage I can claim was an unwavering confidence in my ability to change my circumstance. I did not trust many people, but I trusted myself absolutely.
  Even as a young child, I believed in my mind, my work ethic and my ambition. And so, my journal did not record my hopes for the future. It recorded what would be.
  I have been afraid of many things in my life, but failure was not one of them. Until I had my daughter.
  Because of my childhood, I have spent an inordinate amount of time thinking about all the things I would never do as a parent, all the ways I would be better. I had a determination to create the home life for my child that I wished I had growing up.
  Yet before she breathed her first breath, when she was just a flutter in my stomach, I began to feel a tightness in my chest driven by a fear that I would not be up to the task. That no matter how much I loved her, I would make so many mistakes, mistakes I likely would not even know I was making, mistakes that would somehow scar my child the way that I feel scarred. The confident control I have exercised over my entire life feels so tenuous now that I am in charge of raising another human being who is witnessing me and all of my flaws while her personhood is being formed.
  Even as I now have more empathy for my own parents, I am consumed by the fear that in the most important venture in my life, I will fail. So when my daughter was just a baby, I started writing a journal to her. Over pages and pages, I tell her how much I love her, how much she means to me, how she has changed my life, and own up when I make mistakes.
  My hope is that one day when she is grown, this journal will allow her to extend me some grace for the failures I know I will make. It is a strange conversion. As a child, I did not find hope a useful thing. But now that I have my own, I often feel as if hope is all that I have.

https://www.nytimes.com/2020/05/09/parenting/i-started-to-worry-about-failure.html