Four months ago, after residents and politicians in Indiana and Illinois screamed bloody murder, a train carrying 22,000 gallons of napalm on the way to an Indiana disposal plant was abruptly halted and turned back to California, where the napalm had been moldering since the end of the Vietnam War.
In July, another toxic waste company won the napalm disposal contract. But this time the company, GNI Group Inc., is situated along Houston's heavily industrialized Ship Channel, one of the globe's largest and densest concentrations of petrochemical installations. The result is that that very same first shipment of napalm eased its way into Texas three weeks ago with only the briefest flurry of complaint.
"The people of Houston deal with this kind of stuff all the time," said Robin Yocum, manager of media relations for the Battelle Memorial Institute, the Navy's prime contractor on the project and the company that hired GNI Group. "You say napalm to most people, and they picture the image of that little girl running down the road. But you explain to people in Houston that it's just gasoline mixed with benzene and styrene and they know right away what you're talking about and what you're dealing with."
Local environmentalists say it is still early in their campaign to stop the project, the highlight of which has been a protest outside a Navy recruiting station by someone dressed like a napalm burn victim. They are planning a gathering later this month in downtown Houston to ignite their protest.
"I would have to remind you that up there in Indiana it took them a number of weeks to get organized," said Neal Carman, clean air director for the Lone Star chapter of the Sierra Club. "You know, it's pretty hard to do things outside in this kind of summer. It doesn't make protesting a whole lot of fun."
The environmentalists have an alternative explanation, as well, for the relative lack of citizen outrage over the project, particularly in Deer Park, the community where the napalm will actually be processed.
"People along the Ship Channel don't feel they can do anything about it," said LaNell Anderson, a Houston real estate agent and a member of Grandparents of East Harris County. "They feel powerless, as though they've been designed as a national sacrifice zone. You know, these toxic companies looked for the place with the least resistance and that's why they came here."
Judy Starns lives along the Ship Channel in a working-class community, Channel View, just over the water from the Deer Park plant where the napalm will be processed. "We've already got a toxic soup around here," she said. "We've breathed, choked and slurped enough of that stuff that we're wise and we're fed up. California didn't want it. Indiana didn't want it. Just leave it to Texas."
Mr. Carman said that the argument that napalm is no worse than other Ship Channel chemicals was beside the point. "From my perspective, here we've got U.S. taxpayer dollars adding to the pollution hazards and burden that is already there," he said. "And it's unnecessary. The material could be disposed of out there in California using new, safe technology, without any of these transportation and incineration hazards."
Ron Crabtree, Deer Park's city manager, said his office had received only about 20 phone calls about the napalm project. "The overwhelming response from our residents," Mr. Crabtree said, "has been that this material was of much less hazard than what was already being handled or traveling through our community on a daily basis and that they saw no reason to be concerned."
Napalm, which engulfed villages in flames when it was dropped from planes in the Vietnam War, is a kind of jellied gasoline that burns intensely hot and tends to stick to what it touches, including people. A total of 3.4 million gallons of it had been stored so long in aging aluminum canisters at the Navy's Fallbrook installation outside San Diego that the metal had begun to deteriorate. Local politicians, spurred by residents' concerns, had pushed the Navy to find a disposal site.
In 1994 the Navy came up with the notion of getting rid of the notorious explosive through recycling. Battelle was awarded $28 million as prime contractor and built a $5 million plant at Fallbrook. The napalm was to be squeezed out of the aging canisters like toothpaste and placed inside 6,000-gallon isocontainers aboard railroad cars.
Battelle signed a $3 million contract with Pollution Control Industries in East Chicago, in northwest Indiana. Pollution Control would accept the isocontainers, blend the napalm with a solvent so it would burn at a lower and more predictable heat level, and then ship it to a cement kiln, where it could be burned as fuel, or to another site like a toxic waste disposal incinerator.
Then, in December, Representative Rod Blagojevich, Democrat of Illinois, caught wind that the Navy intended daily rail shipments of napalm through his state and began making noise about it. Local environmentalists joined the chorus, as did several other Illinois and Indiana politicians. Pollution Control decided that the project was more trouble than it was worth.
The GNI Group, which specializes in handling dangerous and toxic substances, had bid on the project the first time around. "We decided to try for it again," said Bill Reeves, GNI's vice president for regulatory affairs. "And then things started happening very quickly."
News reports in early July indicated that GNI was one of three finalists for the contract, leading to a public meeting in Deer Park at which officials from the company as well as from Battelle and the Navy set up booths to explain their plan. About 100 people showed up, Mr. Crabtree said.
"We took a lesson from what happened in Indiana," Mr. Reeves said. "We saw the politicians come out, saw the misinformation of what went around. We just felt that if we got this out to the public, quickly, it would be understood and, by and large, it was."
The first shipment -- 22,000 gallons aboard two railroad cars -- arrived on July 16 and is being stored in a warehouse on the GNI property, just across from the site of the battlefield where Sam Houston won Texas's independence.
The company hopes to bring two containers of napalm onto the property each weekday and feed the napalm into the blending process, shipping out the same amount every day. If GNI Group keeps up that rate, it will take two years to complete the disposal.
"We don't want to get into storage; we want to move it out at the same rate it's coming in," Mr. Reeves said.
But move it out to where?
The Navy would like the napalm shipped to cement kilns, but thus far neither of the two cement companies in Texas has expressed an interest in it. An easy and financially attractive alternative would be to send the material to a toxic waste incinerator on the property just adjacent to GNI. Some environmentalists and residents believe this is the company's real plan.
"Listen, we didn't just fall off the turnip truck yesterday," Ms. Starns said. "They have an incinerator just next door. There's not even a fence. They can take it over there on wheelbarrows, so why are they going to pay to transport it someplace else?"
Mr. Yocum, the media relations manager for Battelle, said that the institute was still looking for a cement kiln to accept the napalm, but that the company would not rule out the possibility that it would end up sending the material next door to be burned. It will take GNI another month or so to get its program up and running, so Battelle has until the end of the month or so to figure out where it will send the blended napalm, Mr. Reeves said.

Graphic

 
Photo: The first shipments of napalm, an unprocessed jellied gasoline, entered Deer Park, Tex., last month to be processed. Warren Norris of the GNI Group, which is recycling the chemical, handled a sample Thursday. (F. Carter Smith for The New York Times)