Almost every night for the last two weeks in Toxteth, a racially mixed working-class suburb of this troubled city, cars are stolen and wrecked or empty buildings are set afire. When policemen or firemen arrive, they are taunted and pelted with rocks.
The pattern is similar to one that developed into major violence here last year and then spread to more than 30 of Britain's cities.  But this year in Toxteth the confrontations ''are more skirmishes then riots,'' said Eric Sorenson, a Government official, and in that he saw some hope.
LIVERPOOL, Aug. 3 - Almost every night for the last two weeks in Toxteth, a racially mixed working-class suburb of this troubled city, cars are stolen and wrecked or empty buildings are set afire.
The disturbances are smaller, according to those on the streets of Toxteth and in the offices of Liverpool, largely because those involved are younger.
''They are 8-to 14-year-old kids,'' according to Michael Showers, a local black spokesman, ''who do not know yet what it is to be shot or clubbed.''
 
Police Response Changes
The police response also has changed. Mr. Sorenson, who directs a central Government task force set up in Liverpool in response to the riots, said: ''The police last year were static. This year, they are much more mobile and that may be contributing to the absence of pitched battles.''
Delroy Burris, a black member of the Merseyside Community Relations Council, a voluntary organization that deals with race relations, said, ''We're getting used to battle gear.''
''Some bobbies on the beat try very hard,'' he said, ''but when there's trouble, they bring in the heavies.'' Much of Toxteth recalls parts of the South Bronx, with the rubble of last year still standing, in some cases surrounded by fencing.  Facing the vacant blocks on one side is an abandoned apartment house, but on the other side there are attractive and bustling housing units.
Last year's troubled summer prompted British officials to take a fresh look at their cities, and to make changes. Toxteth, one of the areas worst hit in the violence, is perhaps typical of many because it received both attention and assistance. But some of it apparently is unwelcome and critics feel that little of it will lead to real change.
 
Trees Are a Symbol
Trees were planted along the edges of some public housing complexes as a ''symbol'' of change, according to officials, but they were apparently seen in those terms by this year's unruly youths because the saplings were among the early targets of destruction.
Several training centers are being established in Toxteth, to help owners of small businesses, young men and women seeking training in technological areas or potential supervisors of other training projects. They should open in September or October, but local leaders have grown impatient.
One of Britain's largest homebuilders has agreed to refurbish a housing complex built in the 1930's, even though the now abandoned blocks of 300 apartments were set afire and partly damaged. Other builders plan similar, but less ambitious, projects.
And in the Liverpool area generally there are additional projects.  The abandoned South Docks area is being rebuilt to house a maritime museum, a garden festival with an exhibition hall and sites for small businesses.
 
Unemployment Is High
But Liverpool's unemployment rate is 20 percent, compared with 13 percent nationwide, while the figure for males is about 33 percent, for young white males perhaps 40 to 50 percent and for young blacks 60 to 70 percent. Paul Sommerfeld, who runs the Merseyside Community Relations Council, said, ''We're talking about massive unemployment that is getting worse.''
There are other complexities, some of them underlined during a visit here Monday by Michael Heseltine, the Environment Secretary who is also called ''Minister for Merseyside'' because of his special responsibility for this area. He came to assess the situation in Croxteth, another working-class district, but was pelted with eggs by children.
The ''child revolution,'' as Lady Margaret Simey, who represents Toxteth in the City Council, put it, has disturbed local officials, who recall how the violent acts of adults were copied in Northern Ireland. Probation officers and experts on family problems say it is endemic in inner city areas where there has been much demolition.
And it appears to be totally integrated in racial terms. A young blond girl rides her bicycle along Upper Parliament Street through street lights smashed into inactivity by teen-agers who could be black or white or both on any given night. Two young mothers, one black and one white, walk their carriages together.
 
'All We've Seen Are Trees'
Mr. Showers, who describes himself as a member of the Liverpool Eight Defense Committee, named after the district designation for the Toxteth area, says he sees little hope ''because the race relations organizations have no bite, because blacks cannot find work, because the police still use provocative language even on patrol and because all we've seen are trees - Heseltine's epitaph will be trees.''
But Mr. Heseltine's deputy, Mr Sorenson, is more optimistic. ''The most obvious direct cause of the riots last year was a complete breakdown between the police and the local colored community. There was also the impact of the recession, which meant just another turn of the screw to those in this area.'' Now both are changing, he said.
''The police have introduced foot patrols, or community police, and that may be helping ease the situation,'' he said. ''We're also getting a lot of help from local community blacks in setting up the workshops, and then there are the commitments by builders to refurbish blocks of flats and finally the citywide projects.''
The task force, he noted, has no budget of its own, except for salaries, but Mr. Heseltine has access to central government funds in the housing and development area. ''We know that the market has been running away from Merseyside, and we're hoping to help check that, and to assist areas such as Toxteth directly. We know the two are related.''

Graphic

 
Illustrations: photo of riot police in Toxteth area of Liverpool