TITLE: WILL MCCORMICK AGENDA ALIGN WITH PA.?; SENATOR-ELECT FACES A PIVOTAL CHALLENGE OF BALANCING THE NEEDS OF STATE WITH THOSE OF NEW PRESIDENT, EXPERTS SAY
TOPIC: Health
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-11-24 00:00:00
SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. A-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Election', 'Indebtedness', 'Health']
LABEL SCORES: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
WASHINGTON - Clad in jeans and a winter jacket, David McCormick stood in front of the U.S. Steel Tower in Downtown Pittsburgh last December to call the iconic American company's potential sale to Japan's largest steel manufacturer a tragedy.
"It's terrible for U.S. security," said Mr. McCormick in a video posted on X. "Nippon Steel has operations in Iran and China and Russia, and we need American steel to help support our economy and our national security."
Now - with Sen. Bob Casey conceding a bitter, tight race amid a recount Thursday - Mr. McCormick will get a chance come January to make good on his pledge to fight for Pennsylvania steelworkers, as well as working families and businesses across the country that he says have been hit hard by the Biden-Harris administration.
"McCormick has an advantage in that voters gave him a road map of what they want done," Vince Galko, a Republican strategist based in northeastern Pennsylvania, told the Post-Gazette. "Getting the economy back in order, closing the border, and Pennsylvania is one of the leading energy-producing states and that's been stifled a bit by Democratic policies. Whatever David McCormick can do to help get Pennsylvania energy flowing again, it's going to benefit the entire nation, lower energy costs, lower inflation and lower the price of goods."
Charlie Gerow, a Republican strategist based in Harrisburg, said the biggest difference between Mr. McCormick and Mr. Casey will be visibility, arguing the senator-elect is "full of energy … and will emerge very quickly as a national leader."
"He's going to focus on getting things done for Pennsylvania," he said. "He'll focus on cutting taxes for working Pennsylvanians, expanding our energy development and curtailing the Chinese threat."
Voters across the state, whether in rural or suburban areas or cities, frequently told the Post-Gazette the economy topped their concerns this election season.
Mr. McCormick, who previously ran one of the world's largest hedge funds, laid out an economic plan in August, calling for middle class tax cuts, increasing the child tax credit to $4,200 for children under 5 and $3,000 for those 6-17, and giving working families access to a tax-free savings account to pay for up to $10,000 in child care costs.
He pushed for a federal tax credit for contributions to scholarship funds, a workforce Pell Grant and expanded registered apprenticeship programs "because technical training and other vocational opportunities deserve the same respect and financial support our country directs toward a four-year college education," he said.
Mr. McCormick also said the U.S., with Pennsylvania's leadership, can become "the world's most energy-dominant nation" - which he said could be a boon for the state's natural gas industry in particular.
U.S. Steel has threatened to pull jobs out of Western Pennsylvania if the deal with Nippon is blocked; Nippon said last week it's committed to making the sale happen.
The Biden administration extended a regulatory review of the deal past the election, though the president says he still opposes it. Trump also opposes it, as do Mr. Casey and Sen. John Fetterman.
"Senator-elect McCormick has created jobs before, and one of the biggest issues out there is what's going on right now with the potential sale of U.S. Steel," Christopher Nicholas, a Harrisburg-based Republican consultant, said. "Biden kind of punted that issue, and [Gov. Josh] Shapiro can't figure out where he stands on this, so it'll be interesting to see how that develops."
How will McCormick work with Fetterman?
Mr. Nicholas added that Mr. McCormick - balancing the state's Senate delegation alongside Mr. Fetterman - will help appoint more conservative judges after a wave of liberal appointments under Mr. Biden's watch.
"For so long Pennsylvania had one of each party," he said. "I think the fact that Fetterman won the other seat in 2022 helped focus Republicans on the need to beat Casey so we could get that Republican voice there. Senators are so important with bringing things home to the state and helping choose federal judges, so it's good to have an experienced Republican voice in there."
Mr. Nicholas added that, "Now, both our senators hail from the 412 [area code]."
"It will be fascinating to me to see how their working relationship evolves," he said, noting it's likely the pair finds common ground on foreign policy and border security.
Larry Ceisler, a Pennsylvania public affairs executive and a Democrat, said that "they're both non-urban, more suburban elected officials," with Mr. Fetterman raised in the suburbs of York before winding up in Braddock, and Mr. McCormick being born in Washington County and raised in Bloomsburg.
"That's a combination that we haven't had for awhile," he said. "They both care deeply about the state. Put the two of them together and it's a very interesting tandem that has the potential - where they can agree on some things - to do some very good things for Pennsylvania."
The pair may also get a unique opportunity to vote on a nomination for a man they both ran against in 2022: Celebrity doctor Mehmet Oz is Trump's pick to lead the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
J.J. Balaban, a Democratic strategist and admaker based in Philadelphia, said it's increasingly rare to have split-party representation in the Senate, and he shrugged off its value in a highly polarized Congress. He said that if Republican experts are genuine in their enthusiasm for balanced representation, "then we look forward to the ads they'll cut for Senator Fetterman in 2028."
Mr. Balaban said Pennsylvania's senators will likely work together on some issues "because they just have to" embrace some level of bipartisanship simply to advance most legislation.
But he recalled that on Capitol Hill in the 1990s, when former Republican Rep. Bud Shuster chaired the House Transportation Committee, "he worked well with a lot of Democrats."
"There was a bipartisan, Pennsylvania-we-gotta-make-this-happen feeling on things like transportation," he said. "That has mostly fallen by the wayside, because you have people who are just significantly more partisan."
Will McCormick stand up to Trump when they disagree?
When the Jan. 6, 2021, attack on the U.S. Capitol by then-President Donald Trump's supporters was raised during a Senate debate in Philadelphia last month, Mr. McCormick began his response by reiterating his stance that he "thought President [Joe] Biden won the 2020 election."
The moment highlighted a key - if not singular - public break with now-President-elect Trump and many of Mr. McCormick's soon-to-be Republican colleagues on Capitol Hill, scores of whom voted to try to overturn Mr. Biden's victory.
That divide likely cost Mr. McCormick Trump's endorsement in 2022, when Trump instead backed Dr. Oz, who won the Senate primary by about 900 votes before losing to Mr. Fetterman.
But now the 59-year-old Army veteran takes over Mr. Casey's seat as part of a Republican sweep of all three branches of government in Washington, where Trump aims to wield unparalleled power and dismantle the so-called "deep state."
While the senator-elect also has promised to shake up the nation's capital after decades of overspending by both parties, experts on both sides of the aisle say Mr. McCormick - who served treasury and national security roles in the George W. Bush administration - is more of a traditional conservative than a firebrand of the MAGA movement that has overtaken the GOP.
As the race began, experts said Mr. McCormick had to balance appeasing Trump's base while not alienating Keystone State moderates who've historically favored voices like Mr. Casey - who won his seat in 2006 as a "pro-life Democrat" - and Republicans like former Sen. Pat Toomey, who voted to convict the former president on an insurrection impeachment charge after the assault on the Capitol.
Despite Trump's harsh words for Mr. McCormick two years ago - blasting him as an establishment "Wall Street Republican" - the pair enthusiastically endorsed each other this year. And Mr. McCormick became a fixture at Trump's rallies, which often saw Democrats, liberals, critics and the press blasted as radicals, communists or the enemy within.
"Now that the campaign is over, I find him more in the traditional mode of a Pat Toomey or a [former Gov.] Tom Ridge," said Mr. Ceisler. "I just don't see MAGA in him."
Mr. Galko described Mr. McCormick as "more in the line of a Ronald Reagan conservative … well prepared to do what's right for Pennsylvania and support Trump's agenda, but if need be, he'll have no qualms about being an independent voice."
"Dave McCormick is a very smart man with a mind of his own," said Mr. Gerow. "He agrees with the Trump agenda, but his priorities are going to be the long-term future of Pennsylvania. And basic math is well known to Dave: He's very aware his term will outlast Trump's."
Mr. Balaban is far less optimistic about the prospect of Mr. McCormick breaking with Trump when warranted. He doubts there's an issue of disagreement before the midterm elections where Mr. McCormick would "stand up to Trump in a tactful way, akin to how [former Sen. John] McCain blocked the repeal of the Affordable Care Act."
"I think it's possible there will be some performative act of independence - opposing his deputy EPA director because he once said Pennsylvania coal mines are terrible or something," he said. "As a result of not being on the ballot till 2030, it stands to reason he'll be a party loyalist at a minimum for the next couple years, and then make shows of independence before he has to face the voters again."
Mr. Ceisler added that the senator-elect has been spared from voting on embattled former Rep. Matt Gaetz's nomination for attorney general, with the Florida Republican pulling his name from consideration after a barrage of criticism from Trump's own party.
"I see a person [in Mr. McCormick] who has ambition and a tremendous amount of experience in areas that when you're sitting in the Senate, it's good to have," Mr. Ceisler added. "But how is he going to deal with Trump policy on China? I don't think he's a neocon, but I don't think he wants to surrender to [Russian President Vladimir] Putin either. At the end of the day, he doesn't strike me as a cultural warrior, which is probably a good thing for Pennsylvania. I see him bearing down on economic issues."
John Feehery, a Republican consultant who previously served as spokesman for former House Speaker Dennis Hastert, R-Ill., told the Post-Gazette that Mr. McCormick has time to establish his own identity "separate from Trump."
He said the senator-elect doesn't "owe Trump anything," but they share a "common cause to implement his working class agenda."
"If Trump is successful in these first two years, it will have a lasting impact on the party stretching four years beyond that," Mr. Feehery said. "If Trump's agenda falls flat or doesn't get out of the Senate, that is bad for all Republicans, especially for McCormick who is in a very tight state no matter what happens."
Jonathan D. Salant contributed reporting.

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Pittsburgh Post-Gazette: David McCormick, who was featured during the second day of the Republican National Convention in Milwaukee, is more of a traditional Republican than a MAGA loyalist, experts say.
PHOTO: Laurence Kesterson/Associated Press: Dave McCormick, who often spoke at Trump rallies this year, is more of a traditional Republican than a MAGA loyalist, experts say.
PHOTO: Sebastian Foltz/Post-Gazette: U.S. Sen. elect David McCormick is more of a traditional Republican than a MAGA loyalist, experts say.