TITLE: Shotgun campaign was Harris' undoing
TOPIC: Health
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-11-08 00:00:00
SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Election', 'Family', 'Health']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
WASHINGTON   Vice President Kamala Harris took a deep breath.
Her voice cracked. She closed her eyes and grimaced while she relived her call with Donald Trump.
"I know folks are feeling and experiencing a range of emotions right now. I get it," she stressed in a concession speech at Howard University on Wednesday. "But we must accept the results of this election."
Harris had spent the final days of her campaign excoriating Trump. She called him a fascist, a petty tyrant and mentally unstable. None of it worked.
Trump was on track to wallop her in every battleground state in the nation, in spite of Harris' surrogate operation, vigorous campaign schedule and a massive cash advantage.
Finger-pointing and second-guessing abounded. Should President Joe Biden have stepped aside earlier? Had she done enough to reach base Democrats? Was her short-lived presidential bid doomed from the start?
Harris had not been expecting to run for president until 2028. And suddenly the task fell to her to deliver a victory against Trump. She had less than three months to put together a winning coalition, and she did not intend to rely on the white working-class men who helped put Biden in office.
Instead, as she was on the precipice of making history, she looked to a new coalition of suburban women, Black voters and anti-Trump Republicans to help her make up the deficit.
She chased undecided voters in the counties immediately surrounding Democratic-strongholds. She campaigned in the final weeks of the race with the Obamas and unlikely surrogates such as former Republican Congresswoman Liz Cheney, instead of Biden, and emphasized issues such as women's health, Trump's fitness for office and the protection of American democracy.
Harris thought her work as vice president would give her an advantage.
Yet suburban women, independents, African-American men, Hispanic voters, moderate Republicans, Asian Americans, blue-collar workers and Gen Zers did not turn out for her with the intensity she needed to win. The so-called blue wall had faltered. The Sun Belt had snapped.
"All the 'secret Kamala' voters - there were secret Trump voters," Angelo Greco, a progressive strategist, lamented after Harris' remarks at Howard.
Harris brought the same closed-offness to the campaign that afflicted her vice presidency, briefly showing what she could be like, unburdened by what had been, only to retreat  into herself.
Her allies argued she was not entirely to blame. She inherited the campaign apparatus that Biden left her, including a fractured leadership structure and senior aides who did not know how to organize in communities of color.
Democrats knew the election would be tight. And Harris acknowledged from the get-go that she was behind.
"Biden was tanking, she stepped in, we rallied, we did everything we possibly could in effectively three months," Reproductive Freedom for All president Mini Timmaraju said the morning after the election.
The party must take a hard look at why Americans responded the way they did to Harris, she said. "And I don't think that's all on her."
Harris had known that her political fate would be intertwined with Biden's whether he won or lost, and she had spent the past 21/2 years working to make sure that did not happen.
But then the president made the most important decision of her career for her. And she wasn't even the last person in the room.
Biden's big decision
It started out as a normal weekend for the vice president. After a fundraiser for Biden in Provincetown, Massachusetts, she settled into an evening at home with her niece, Meena, and her two daughters.
Biden's political career was hanging by a thread after a calamitous debate.
He called the next morning. It was over. Harris dialed her husband, Doug Emhoff. Her closest advisers sprang into action.
They'd been quietly preparing for a Harris 2028 presidential bid since 2022 and were building lists of every person who had interacted with her in a photo line, on a rope line, at a roundtable, introduced her at an event or attended a gathering at her residence.
"After the debate, there were definitely a lot of people in our ears saying we needed to be ready," one person who was part of the discussions said.
Harris would not announce her candidacy publicly for several hours after Biden said she was running. She was careful, and deliberative, and wrote several drafts. She wanted to be respectful to Biden, whom Harris' team felt had been mistreated by his friends.
The switch to Harris brought energy and hope said Jason Vaughn, 50, a nurse practitioner from Greensboro, North Carolina, in an interview in October.
Biden said he would not drop from the ticket, insisting he was the Democrats' best chance at beating the former president. Left unsaid: Biden did not think Harris, who some Democrats had suggested kicking off the ticket a year earlier, could win the election.
"If Biden dropped out earlier, there would have been chaos in the Democratic Party, because there would have been too many people who would have wanted to have some sort of brokered convention," civil rights leader and Biden and Harris ally Marc Morial said in an interview before the votes were counted.
Biden had elevated Harris nationally. Now he was her albatross. Harris faced immense pressure during the campaign to distinguish herself from her boss. She resisted.
Harris did not distance herself from Biden until he referred to her opponent's supporters as "garbage" a week before the election over a racist joke about Puerto Rico a comedian told at a Trump rally.
Harris was frustrated that the incident overshadowed her speech at the Ellipse in Washington but did not want to speak out against her friend, a person familiar with the incident said.
Biden campaigned separately from Harris, and she reinforced she'd bring generational and societal change by hitting the trail with entertainers Cardi B and Beyonce. As she drew her sharpest contrast with Trump, rallying her supporters on the Ellipse, the sitting president was locked up, politically, in the White House.
A turning point
The work to redeem Harris began in 2022 after party insiders used anonymous reports to assail the sitting vice president.
She shook up her staff and launched a rehabilitation campaign with an intentional schedule that included visits to early primary, battleground and delegate-rich states during the midterms to talk about progressive issues. She visited more than two dozen college campuses.
Her team thought her strength would hinge on women, who cared about abortion rights, and young voters, to whom the president did not appeal.
"We knew we had to stake the claim on those two constituencies," a person involved in the planning said, "and show that we could move the needle with those two constituencies to shut, frankly, the insiders up."
They stopped the bleeding. But they had to hustle to introduce her to much of the country once she became the nominee.
Harris' friends and longtime aides say there's a down-to-earth quality that shines through when the former prosecutor, who served as San Francisco district attorney and California attorney general, is in smaller and more intimate settings.
"She is used to talking to people in distress and one on one, and that's a side of her that I don't think a lot of people see," said Kristine Lucius, the vice president's domestic policy adviser and her final chief of staff in the U.S. Senate, said an interview in October.
Moderates and suburban women
That was the Harris that Republican strategist Sarah Longwell met with her wife and two children backstage at an event in a suburb of Philadelphia.
Longwell, who publishes "The Bulwark," had met Harris a few weeks before. The campaign asked her to moderate a conversation with Cheney and undecided voters.
Longwell knew from the focus groups she conducts that undecided voters felt they did not know Harris well, She asked the vice president to explain what would be different if she were elected.
Harris' team zeroed in on right-leaning independents and moderate Republicans who had voted for Nikki Haley in the GOP primary to pad their margins.
They held events in Pennsylvania, Wisconsin and Michigan with Cheney. They also targeted Arizona, which the late U.S. Sen. John McCain had represented. His son Jim endorsed Harris.
Harris' campaign believed those voters would switch their allegiance.
Harris had a double-digit advantage in polling with women across the country, and in the swing states, and it thought it could use reproductive rights to drive up turnout from young, independent and Republican-leaning women, who live in the suburbs.
The vice president had followed her "gut" two years earlier, the person familiar with the campaign said, when she zeroed in on abortion rights, after making it one of her signature issues on the Judiciary Committee in the U.S. Senate. And she did so again as a presidential candidate, even as polling data showed the economy outranked abortion for most voters.
She labeled state-passed restrictions "Trump abortion bans" and said the Republican would sign a federal law if he were presented with one. She amped up voters in the last week of her campaign with comments he made about protecting women "whether they like it or not."
Allied groups had already built the infrastructure in Michigan, where an abortion rights ballot measure passed in 2022, and Wisconsin, where Democrats flipped control of the state Supreme Court on the issue in 2023. They agreed with her approach.
The strategy was a bust. In crucial suburban counties in both states, plus Pennsylvania, she was unable to match or significantly improve on Biden's performance four years earlier.
'What's in it for my family?'
Illinois Gov. JB Pritzker, a member of Harris' national advisory board, was hopeful in a late-October interview.
In his remarks at a canvass, Pritzker made an unprompted admission that saving democracy may not be an effective closing message.
"I think the motivator, ultimately, for people is, you know, what's in it for my family, my community, you know, am I going to do better with this person?" he said afterward, in the interview.
Surveys were showing a wide gender gap and Harris lagging with male voters at the time. Blue-collar voters had been Biden's area of expertise. Harris sent her running mate, Minnesota Gov. Tim Walz, across the Midwest to bring them back into the fold.
In the end, Harris was able to minimize her losses with white men. Exit polling showed her performing roughly as well with the group as Biden.
The concerns drove Harris to focus on Pittsburgh and neglect the Philadelphia area and its eastern suburbs for much of her short-lived campaign.
But Harris had ignored Allentown, which has a large Hispanic and Puerto Rican population, until the Monday before the election. She performed worse than Biden. Nearby counties flipped to Trump.
Yet, reflecting on the results, Stephanie Valencia, an outside adviser to the Harris campaign on Latino outreach, said Wednesday: "That moment of contrast, might have been too late."
Harris suffered deep losses with Latino men all over the map. Trump won the demographic with 54% of the vote nationally, exit polling showed, in a stunning reversal from when Biden won 59% of those votes.
Real talk in Michigan
Harris knew long before she became the party's nominee Democrats were losing support from Black men.
She  launched a tour emphasizing entrepreneurship in Atlanta, Charlotte and Detroit. She followed up in October by releasing an economic agenda for Black men.
But the campaign made crucial missteps. It did not put enough emphasis on talking directly to Black voters, NAACP President Derrick Johnson said Wednesday. "It is assumed they're going to vote a certain way, and there is no persuasion."
The vice president's coalitions director, Chris Scott, described a dysfunctional structure in which Biden's campaign  never fully merged with Harris'.
"I do not ever believe that the leadership on that side fully understood her, and that was reflected in how department execution happened, even after the switch. It was still too reactionary, and it wasn't proactive," he said.
At a barbershop in Michigan two weekends before the election, Morial, the civil rights leader, showed up ready to receive some tough love. Democrats had neglected to do enough organizing in Black communities, and it was beginning to show.
Working through the National Urban League's Civic Engagement Fund, Morial paired up with Win with Black Men, an organization founded by Obama alums to help engage the community. Scott, a Detroit native, came too.
The real talk that took place hit on a touchy issue. Black men in attendance said they'd had conversations with friends who did not want to vote for Harris because she was a woman.
Obama had warned Harris' campaign about the issue when he met with them to discuss Black outreach, a person familiar with the campaign said.
The percentage of Black men who cast a ballot for Harris nationally remained on par with Biden four years before, but she trailed Biden by double digits in swing states such as Pennsylvania and North Carolina. Both fell to Trump.
She also lost Georgia to Trump by roughly 2 percentage points as more voters cast ballots there than four years earlier for both her and Trump.
Harris' standout moment a year before had come in Dubai, as she spoke out further than any Biden administration official had before on the Israel-Hamas war. She tread lightly as a candidate but was explicit about her willingness to supply arms to Israel.
Groups such as the Uncommitted Movement declined to endorse Harris.  Outside Harris' rally in Kalamazoo, more than a dozen pro-Palestinian protesters held signs and joined together in chants like, "Kamala you can't hide, you're committing genocide."
Inside her events the number of protests increased, too. Her early response was to swat back. As time went on, she began to tell them they would make their voices heard in the election.
In Michigan, the VP fell short after Stein pulled in nearly 1% of the vote. Trump won the city of Dearborn, which has a majority Arab population.
Harris' rally in East Lansing was one of multiple events in the final stretch where she made an explicit appeal to Gen Z, whom her campaign had tried to motivate with TikTok, memes and its vibes campaign.
But as it turned out, vibes don't vote.
A grim realization
The Sunday evening before the election, Bernice King, noted on a Win With Black Women call that the presidential inauguration on Jan. 20 was taking place at an auspicious time.
If the vice president won the election, King pointed out, she'd be taking the oath of office on the holiday that honors the contribution of her father, the Rev. Martin Luther King Jr., to the civil rights movement. King could not envision a scenario where Trump was inaugurated on her father's birthday.
"If he's inaugurated, that's a wake-up call," King said.
Trump won handily. And the Democratic Party is now in soul-searching mode. Biden had promised to be a transitional president. And in the end he was. Just not in the way, Harris, and many in her party, had hoped.
Harris' term in office will end on the same day Trump's begins. She said in a Wednesday concession that the fight will carry on.
But what role she will play, she'll have to decide.
About this series
This story is part of USA TODAY's occasional series Campaign Whisperers. The series took an in-depth look at the aspiring presidential candidates, lawmakers and officials President Joe Biden and now Vice President Kamala Harris' reelection team chose as surrogates working to address dissent, smooth out tensions, and, ultimately, get swing voters. For its final installment, we look at Harris, who went from surrogate to candidate.

Graphic

 
Harris