TITLE: Congress scrambles to head off government shutdown; Trump calls for rejecting the bipartisan agreement
TOPIC: Health
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-12-20 00:00:00
SECTION: NEWS; Pg. A4
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX

BODY:
"A lot of folks have had second thoughts (on the bill) and
so now we gotta recalibrate."
Rep. Kevin Hern
R-Okla.
WASHINGTON   There is a notable absence of holiday cheer on Capitol Hill, as lawmakers are under pressure to avoid a late-December government shutdown.
After Congress reached a bipartisan agreement Tuesday to keep the government funded through March, conservative fallout over the beefy bill toppled it. Current funding runs out end of day Friday.
President-elect Donald Trump came out against Congress' plan, introducing a surprising, last-minute complication.
"Republicans must GET SMART and TOUGH," Trump and Vice President-elect JD Vance wrote in a joint statement Wednesday. "If Democrats threaten to shut down the government unless we give them everything they want, then CALL THEIR BLUFF."
Trump later threatened Republican lawmakers who ignore his priorities on the government funding fight with primary opposition next election.
"Everything should be done, and fully negotiated, prior to my taking Office on January 20th, 2025," he shared on Truth Social.
Lawmakers reached a bipartisan agreement Tuesday on a continuing resolution, or CR, a stopgap measure to prevent a government shutdown and furloughs for thousands of federal employees over the holidays. Government funding expires Friday night.
But the over 1,500-page bill has been met with hailstorm of criticism, primarily from conservatives upset over the breadth of add-ons within the funding package, which range from disaster relief to pay raises for lawmakers.
"I was hoping for just a clean CR with a few things like disaster relief and an extension of flood insurance. Sort of a weeny Christmas tree," said Sen. John Kennedy, R-La. "This one looks like the Christmas tree at Rockefeller Center."
The holiday-themed nickname of "Christmas tree" refers to an abundance of ornaments, or extra provisions and amendments, hung on a must-pass funding bill.
"One of the worst bills ever written," billionaire and Trump confidant Elon Musk wrote in one of several X posts calling for lawmakers to reject the resolution.
House Republican leaders are scrambling for a plan B, potentially crafting a more bare-bones resolution that will win back enough support from their caucus. But if GOP members throw out the old version in favor of a cleaner funding extension, they risk losing backing from congressional Democrats who still control the Senate.
The process is already causing GOP rifts weeks before Trump is set to be sworn into office.
Sen. Josh Hawley, R-Mo., said he spoke with Trump Wednesday evening on the phone, and the president-elect expressed frustration with House Speaker Mike Johnson's handling of the funding extension.
"Is this how you want your government to run?" Hawley said he asked Trump. "I mean, these guys can't manage their way out of a paper bag."
Following the backlash from Trump and others, Johnson, R-La., spent hours holed up in his office Wednesday, visited by a rotating door of fellow Republicans seeking a path forward.
Rep. Kevin Hern, R-Okla., said the day had been "pretty crazy," upon exiting his meeting with Johnson.
"A lot of folks have had second thoughts (on the bill) and so now we gotta recalibrate," he said.
Fellow Oklahoma Republican Rep. Tom Cole, appropriations chairman, did not answer repeated questions about the state of affairs while on his way into the speaker's office.
On Thursday, Kentucky Republican Sen. Rand Paul threw billionaire Musk's name in the hat to replace Johnson as speaker amid chaos on Capitol Hill.
"The Speaker of the House need not be a member of Congress," Paul said in a post on social media site X, Musk's social media platform. "Nothing would disrupt the swamp more than electing Elon Musk... think about it... nothing's impossible. (not to mention the joy at seeing the collective establishment, aka 'uniparty,' lose their ever-lovin' minds)."
Musk is not a member of Congress, and though all House speakers have been representatives, there is no rule saying that is a requirement.
Trump and his allies are calling for a temporary funding bill without many of the extra initiatives in the Tuesday bipartisan plan.
However, some GOP lawmakers warn they don't want the resolution slimmed too far down.
Sen. Lindsay Graham, R-S.C., whose home state was hit earlier this year by the devastating Hurricane Helene, said he will not vote for a proposal if it does not include disaster funding. "To anybody who thinks disaster relief is pork, come to where I live," he said.
The funding proposal includes about $100billion in disaster aid.
But Trump and Vance also introduced another gigantic hurdle amid the looming government shutdown: raise the debt ceiling, or the amount of money Congress is allowed to borrow in order to pay bills it's already agreed to.
"Increasing the debt ceiling is not great but we'd rather do it on Biden's watch. If Democrats won't cooperate on the debt ceiling now, what makes anyone think they would do it in June during our administration?" Trump and Vance said in their statement. "Let's have this debate now."
On Thursday, Trump said Congress should eliminate the debt ceiling, putting his support behind an idea popular among some Democrats. Trump told NBC News in a phone interview that getting rid of the debt ceiling would be the "smartest thing it (Congress) could do," adding, "I would support that entirely."
The debt limit suspension ends on Jan. 1. The agreement allows a few extra months for the Treasury Department to use "extraordinary measures" to pay the bills.
What was once upon a time a relatively routine process, raising this cap has become an intense partisan battle every two years. And it's a must-do in 2025.
Democratic lawmakers criticized Trump's call for a shutdown, saying they're not bailing out their colleagues.
"House Republicans have been ordered to shut down the government. And hurt the working class Americans they claim to support," House Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries, D-N.Y., said in a post responding to Trump's opposition. "You break the bipartisan agreement, you own the consequences that follow."
Any deal House Republicans cut will have to go through Senate Democrats - who have little incentive to agree to GOP demands, given they will have no negotiating power under the coming year's Republican trifecta of both chambers of Congress and the White House.
A group of Senate Democratic Appropriations Committee members huddled Wednesday night on the Senate floor with Majority Leader Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., but members did not indicate what Democrats may be willing to agree to. "Republicans have a hard time governing," said Sen. Gary Peters, D-Mich. "This just shows what we're gonna be dealing with over the next two years."
The White House on Wednesday accused Republicans of "playing politics" and taking the risk of creating "instability across the country."
"Triggering a damaging government shutdown would hurt families who are gathering to meet with their loved ones and endanger the basic services Americans from veterans to Social Security recipients rely on. A deal is a deal. Republicans should keep their word," White House press secretary Karine Jean-Pierre said in a statement.
Contributing: Anna Kaufman and Sam Woodward, USA TODAY
"A lot of folks have had second thoughts (on the bill) and
so now we gotta recalibrate."
Rep. Kevin Hern
R-Okla.

Graphic

 
Speaker of the House Mike Johnson, middle, is facing rifts in the Republican Party over a deal to keep the government funded.
Jack Gruber/USA TODAY