TITLE: GLASS CEILING BLUES; AFTER TWO PRESIDENTIAL LOSSES, WOMEN ACROSS REGION WONDER WHAT IT WILL TAKE
TOPIC: Health
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: Other publisher
DATE: 2024-11-10 00:00:00
SECTION: ASECTION; Pg. A-1
SOURCE_FILE: Other publishers/Files (500) (1).DOCX
LABEL: ['Election', 'Health', 'Religion']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
When 31-year-old Brigid Colligan walked into the voting booth Tuesday afternoon, she was hopeful.
Hopeful that Vice President Kamala Harris would be elected as the first woman president of the United States and that the country wouldn't elect a convicted felon who previously boasted about sexually assaulting women and who took credit for the U.S. Supreme Court overturning Roe v. Wade.
She stayed up until about 1 a.m. Wednesday watching results roll in. "I woke up intermittently and I think it was around 4 or 5 … that I realized it's over," the South Park resident said.
The vice president conceded the race later Wednesday, leaving many women across the country crushed by yet another failure to shatter the glass ceiling that leaders in nations such as the United Kingdom and Germany long ago broke through.
Multiple factors were at work, political pundits argue. Ms. Harris entered the race mid-summer after the sitting president, Joe Biden, decided not to run; her campaign was tied to an unpopular president and his administration; she didn't talk about the economy enough in ways with which working class voters could connect.
But many still believe some voters were not ready to vote for a woman, let alone one who is Black and South Asian.
Seeing former President Donald Trump win both the Electoral College and popular votes, with about 72.8 million votes, Ms. Colligan said it felt like women had been forgotten.
"This election is a betrayal on women and women's rights," she said.
Even some longtime Republicans voted for Ms. Harris over their party's candidate because of the impact of women's rights in this election. Judith Painter, a 77-year-old Republican who voted for Ms. Harris on Tuesday, said she believed Trump was misogynist and racist in the way he spoke about women and people of different races.
At her voting precinct on Mount Washington, she said it was "the most wonderful thing in the world" to have a woman run as president.
Language used by the GOP candidate in rallies and interviews throughout the campaign was often inflammatory. Trump "used gender and race as part of the attack," said Debbie Walsh, the director of the Center for American Women and Politics at the Rutgers University Eagleton Institute of Politics.
In the months after Mr. Biden stepped down and Ms. Harris became the Democratic candidate, Trump - and his supporters and surrogates - called her "stupid" and "mentally incompetent," suggested that she had only made it this far in her career because of sexual favors and tried to paint her as "unfit to lead."
Trump's discourse, though, echoed beliefs that some voters already held.
"[Some voters] have this nagging belief that women aren't strong enough and tough enough to start with," Ms. Walsh said. "And then you have this candidate talking about her being unfit … all of this rhetoric to undermine her, which then feeds into what may well already be there in a voter's mind.
"That's the challenge that any woman running for the President of the United States will face now and has always faced," Ms. Walsh said. "It's disrupting the notion of who can be president."
Dana Brown, executive director of the Pennsylvania Center for Women and Politics at Chatham University, remembers being taught in her elementary school that the president was the "father of the nation."
Other democracies across the globe have had women in their highest positions of power, but that's likely because of institutional differences, according to Ms. Brown. In parliamentary systems, there are typically more than two political parties - unlike in the U.S. - and more opportunities for leadership.
When Hillary Clinton ran in 2016, "a lot of America was just getting comfortable with the idea of potentially having a woman president," Ms. Brown said.
"She almost needed to lose to teach America to be comfortable with women in leadership," she said.
And Ms. Clinton won the popular vote in 2016 against Trump - showing that millions of voters were fine with choosing a woman as their leader.
"We know that Americans will pull the lever for a woman for president," she said. "We know that Americans pull the lever for a woman for vice president. Nancy Pelosi was speaker of the House twice. We see women on both sides of the aisle leading legislative chambers as speakers and presidents of the Senate. We see women who are governors."
Peggy Shorts, 58, of Upper St. Clair, said she had no problem with a woman running for president. In fact, she was happy to see a woman run for the highest office - and hopes to see more run in the future.
But with the economy top of mind, Ms. Shorts voted for Trump on Tuesday.
"I just didn't feel Kamala was qualified in this time of her life," she said.
Historically, men who have held political positions of power are the ones who, later in their careers, make a run at the presidency.
"With the exception of Dwight Eisenhower and Donald Trump, most of our presidents came from the United States Senate or from state capitals as governors," Ms. Walsh said. "Two women lost, absolutely. How many men have lost when they ran for the presidency?"
Other voters on Tuesday often said that they weren't "diehard Trumpers," but favored his position on the economy and immigration over Ms. Harris'.
In January, Trump will be sworn in, the 47th president in the 248 years the country has been electing them.
Ms. Harris cemented her place in history as the first woman to serve as vice president, but she falls in a long line of women who have run for the top job, dating back to the 1800s.
Victoria Claflin Woodhull was the first woman to run for the presidency, in 1872, according to the Center for Women in Politics at Rutgers University. She ran as a member of the Equal Rights Party and faced Ulysses S. Grant and Horace Greeley, nearly 50 years before women had the constitutional right to vote.
Over the next 150 years, many women would run for the position across a number of political parties. The year 2020 was a banner one.
Seven women - U.S. Sens. Amy Klobuchar D-Minn., Elizabeth Warren D-Mass., and Kristen Gillibrand D-N.Y.; U.S. Rep. Tulsi Gabbard, who ran as a Democrat but has since switched her party; author and activist Marianne Williamson; psychology lecturer Jo Jorgensen; and Ms. Harris, who at the time was a U.S. senator from California - all tossed their names into the hat, though none made it onto the November ballot.
"We have more and more women who are positioned to make viable runs for the presidency," Ms. Walsh said.
But the next woman presidential candidate will face a country that overwhelmingly voted for Trump. Those voters not only chose Trump, but they also signaled that the rhetoric he uses and the way he speaks about women and other elected officials are not deal-breakers, Ms. Walsh said.
"We can't forget that's part of who he is, but it's also who half of the electorate voted for," she said.
The next female candidate may have to grapple with a downward trend in women voting for the Democratic presidential candidates. In 2016, Ms. Clinton won women by 13 points and Mr. Biden won them by 15 points in 2020. Ms. Harris won them by 10 points this year, according to CNN exit polls.
White women notably voted primarily for Trump, according to exit polls. "I was expecting a larger gender gap," Ms. Brown said. "Ten points is a pretty average gender gap."
With the fall of the 1973 Roe v. Wade decision protecting abortion rights, she said she had anticipated that issue would play a larger role in voters' minds. "While abortion still was a salient issue, it did not rival the economy," she said.
Still, 81-year-old Jodie Hartman, of Peters, went to the polls Tuesday thinking of her three daughters and her granddaughter. That was why she voted for Ms. Harris.
"I was alive before Roe [v. Wade]," Ms. Hartman said. "I'm old enough to remember that and I don't want to go back to that. … I don't think any man has the right to tell a woman what to do with their body."
Ms. Colligan said she thought there was a "very good chance" that once Trump takes office, a federal abortion ban could shortly follow. Project 2025 advocates for a federal ban, criminalizing medical abortions and expanding federal surveillance of pregnant people, among other things.
The policy initiative, funded by the Heritage Foundation, is a nearly 900-page set of recommendations for Trump once he gets into office. The policies range on everything from women's rights, to climate policy, to foreign policy. Trump has attempted to distance himself from the conservative policy initiative but many of the people involved are former Trump administration or campaign staffers.
Days after the election, abortion rights was still more than a salient issue for Ms. Colligan. "I just hope that women and others realize what they've done and what the possible consequences of this will be."

Graphic

 
PHOTO: Stephanie Scarbrough/Associated Press: Kamala Harris delivers her concession speech Wednesday at Howard University, her alma mater, in Washington.
PHOTO: Melina Mara/The Washington Post: Hillary Clinton and Donald Trump at a presidential debate at Hofstra University in Hempstead, N.Y., on Sept. 26, 2016. Trump frequently dismissed Clinton as "unbalanced" and "unhinged" during the campaign.
PHOTO: Maansi Srivastava/The New York Times: Hillary Clinton won the popular vote in 2016 against Donald Trump, proof that millions of voters were fine with choosing a woman as their leader.
PHOTO: Andrew Harnik/Getty Images: Vice President Kamala Harris departs the stage after delivering her concession speech Wednesday at Howard University, her alma mater, in Washington.
PHOTO: Stephanie Scarbrough/Associated Press: Kamala Harris delivers her concession speech Wednesday at Howard University, her alma mater, in Washington.
PHOTO: Stephanie Scarbrough/Associated Press: Kamala Harris delivers her concession speech Wednesday at Howard University, her alma mater, in Washington.
PHOTO: Maansi Srivastava/The New York Times: Hillary Clinton won the popular vote in 2016 against Donald Trump, proof that millions of voters were fine with choosing a woman as their leader.