It's fall, the Serious Movie Season, and theaters were packed this past weekend with fans eager to see one of the best-reviewed movies of the year, "You Can Count on Me," winner of the Sundance Film Festival.
Never heard of it? Maybe that's because the film opened on a grand total of eight screens, and expanded to another 27 this weekend. There is a slim chance that this bittersweet drama about a sister (Laura Linney) and brother (Mark Ruffalo) in small-town New England will make it into your local megaplex -but only if it continues to rack up big audiences at small theaters.
And that's tough to do. Despite the diminishing profits of art house movies -- once known as "independent" films, now usually called "niche" or "specialty" or "low-budget" -- a tidal wave of them continues to flood the market. The result is that very few ever find an audience, no matter how good they are.
"A film like 'You Can Count on Me' is one of the best films I've seen this year. You sit there watching it and you want to tell all your friends about it, but how many people will get to see it?" asks Paul Dergarabedian, president of Exhibitor Relations, which tallies box office results. "At its widest point I don't know if it'll be in 2,000 theaters."
Paramount Classics put the film in additional theaters based on its encouraging opening a week ago, and after that, "you just don't know," says studio head David Dinerstein. "The question is, how wide can this go at the end of the day? Can it cross over?"
Increasingly, the answer for art house movies is, probably not.
Of the fall films, only the crowd-pleasing "Billy Elliot" -- about a working-class kid striving to be a ballet dancer -- has been sneaking its way out of tiny theaters into larger ones.
A study last month by Variety found that the box office for art house films is down a massive 15 percent compared with last year. Even more worrisome for studio executives: Ticket sales for specialty films are down 31 percent overall since 1990, even as the number of films released has gone up.
(Variety considered movies released on fewer than 600 screens as art house fare.)
That is in sharp contrast with the overall picture. The box office total for all movies is up significantly over the past 10 years, from about $ 5 billion to $ 7.5 billion.
The art house business "is in the worst shape it's been in in years, there's no doubt about that," says Mark Gill, who heads Miramax's West Coast operation. "There are far too many movies opening every weekend. … Everywhere you look is another ad, another five pieces of publicity for another art house film."