TITLE: Alan Moore Beckons Readers Into a Rich New Fantasy World
TOPIC: Religion
SCORE: 0.999999
PUBLISHER: New York Times
DATE: 2024-10-26 00:00:00
SECTION: BOOKS; review
SOURCE_FILE: NYT/2.DOCX
LABEL: ['Art', 'Religion', 'Books']
LABEL: [0.999999, 0.999999, 0.999999]

BODY:
With the first volume of a new series and an instructional book on magic, the "Watchmen" author wants an imaginary revolution.
"Have you got a name or should I just keep thinking of you as 'the liability?'" a beautiful young woman named Grace asks the protagonist of Alan Moore's THE GREAT WHEN (Bloomsbury, 315 pp., $29.99).
He does indeed: Our hero rejoices in the name of Dennis Knuckleyard, and that's the least of his problems. Dennis, a miserable teenager who works in a bookshop for a phlegmy old crone named Coffin Ada, has been sold a dangerous book — "A London Walk," which ought not to exist outside the fiction of horror writer Arthur Machen, but has somehow left the world of ideas and entered his possession. He must properly dispose of it or be drawn into a magical world called Long London that exists parallel to the Shoreditch of 1949 where Dennis usually resides. Also, at least some of Long London's inhabitants possess the ability and possibly the inclination to turn Dennis inside out.
"The Great When," a book with a keen sense of the uncanny, has a pleasant lightness. At his 40th birthday party in 1993, Moore announced after what he later described as "more beers than I should have had" that he was going to become a magician, and his work has changed dramatically in the intervening not-quite 31 years. He is still the same formally daring writer who, in "Watchmen" with the artist Dave Gibbons, dealt American superhero comics a blow from which they never really recovered.
But his goals have become far loftier. His final comics project and arguably his masterpiece, "The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen" with Kevin O'Neill, ballooned into a MAD-style parody of … well, of everything. His last novel, "Jerusalem," was a work of similarly staggering ambition and density, part historical survey of Northampton — his lifelong hometown — and part meditation on the afterlife, with smatterings of literary homage, autobiography and semiotics. "The Great When" is a third as long as "Jerusalem," paced like the kind of adventure story at which Moore so excelled in his comics scripts, and written in an urbane voice rich with jokes and memorable names and turns of phrase. It's a sort of reversal of Waugh or Wodehouse — the witty narration is retained but instead of a realistic novel about the marriageable upper classes, we have a monster-filled fantasy about a virginal working-class sad sack.
"The Great When" is one of two new books — both clad in purple covers — from Moore this October, the other being a long-awaited gold-encrusted grimoire called THE MOON AND SERPENT BUMPER BOOK OF MAGIC (Top Shelf, 350 pp., $49.99), which is best described as an instruction manual for getting into the magical realm in "The Great When" by yourself and having a look around. The "Bumper Book" is written with Steve Moore, who died in 2014, six years after the pair announced the project, and illustrated by Rick Veitch, Ben Wickey, John Coulthart and Kevin O'Neill. Steve (no relation) was Alan's partner in his occult studies and an editor of a little magazine about the strangest fringes of the news called "The Fortean Times" (named for Charles Fort, the turn-of-the-century journalist who became popular writing about dubious phenomena like spontaneous human combustion and ball lightning).
After that fateful birthday party in 1993, Moore and Moore formed a magical society in the Hermetic tradition — a lineage that includes Rosicrucians, Theosophists and Aleister Crowley — which they called The Moon and Serpent Egyptian Theatre of Marvels. At the Theatre, they and their friends performed ceremonies of music and poetry for audiences in Northampton. "The Moon and Serpent Bumper Book of Magic" is filled with do-it-yourself pages suggesting useful ways to make idols, meditate, explore the sephiroth of the Kabbalah, and read your own tarot cards, punctuated by comics about the lives of various magical practitioners and chapters of a novella in which the heroine tries each magical ceremony for herself. (The best of these interstitials, predictably, is O'Neill's collaboration, a serialized biography of the snake-handling Roman ventriloquist Alexander of Abonoteichus, whose scammy puppet-god, Glycon, Alan Moore has adopted as his own patron deity.)
There's also a maze and a connect-the-dots activity.
Underpinning the whole project lies a conviction that the imagination is not merely an interesting place but a shared place, one where people can freely investigate the same priceless ideas. It's a position that constant readers will find familiar from Moore's comics, especially his and J.H. Williams's "Promethea," a sort of magical initiation of the reader disguised as a superhero series.
That notion of a shared imagination is central to "The Great When," where ideas imported from Long London carry a real-world weight that realizes the theories of the "Bumper Book." In the novel, a doleful journalist called "Tolerable" John McAllister, one of Dennis Knuckleyard's few close friends, observes that England itself is in a period of reinvention in 1949.
"The war turned Britain into somewhere else," John muses. "It had to. When it was still going on, everyone knew that this would have to be a different country when the war was finished, that it couldn't just go back to being for the benefit of wealthy toffs who claimed that poverty was what the poor deserved for being lazy, stupid, and incapable. You can't say that to people who've just saved us from a century or two of Nazi Europe, can you?" But what will the new Britain be? Will it give the poor their due, or will it become a mausoleum for its former glories? "[We'll] probably decide that destitution's not too bad, so long as you can dress it in a Union Jack waistcoat," John predicts gloomily.
The bulk of "The Great When" may be set in 1949, but its themes of useless austerity, unfair debt and crushing poverty feel especially pointed as Britain emerges from a destitute decade under its now-ousted Conservative leaders. Moore seems to see the refusal to face reality as a failure of imagination. And since imagination is the realm he has been dutifully exploring and mapping out since that fateful night in 1993, its defense is especially important to him.
Several odd characters appear in both books, most notably the obscure painter and draftsman (and, of course, magician) Austin Osman Spare, a real historical figure. Spare is Dennis's guide to the world of magic — he shows Dennis how to get into Long London and introduces him to friends who will help him on his journey — but he is also an important character in the Moores' pantheon of magic. Spare, like Alan Moore's beloved William Blake, is both an artist and a magician — he once drew a set of cards for divining the outcome of horse races — something to which the reader of the "Bumper Book" is encouraged to aspire.
I ought to admit that I couldn't get the less probable parts of the "Bumper Book" to work for me — I achieved neither lucid dreaming nor remote viewing in my own attempted wizardry, though I freely admit to cutting some important corners as I read its instructions in various Brooklyn pizzerias. As a guidebook to the surprisingly welcoming terrain of Moore's own enormous clockwork intellect, though, the "Bumper Book" is both imaginative and the cause of imagination in others. It is very interesting to imagine meeting a supernatural being, and possibly the same thing as actually meeting one. Different people will come away with different benefits from the volume, but I was comforted by its implication that my own experiences of religious transcendence might be "real" outside the charismatic form of Christianity I no longer practice.
It helps that neither Moore nor Moore seem especially hung up on whether or not their descriptions of demonic intelligences and historical hearsay can be verified empirically. "Upon examination it becomes evident that most of our everyday waking experience and behavior is predicated on the insubstantial foundations of our dreaming imagination," the Moores pronounce. Perhaps that's not true, but then, perhaps it is.
Ultimately, both "The Moon and Serpent Bumper Book of Magic" and "The Great When" are books about the problems and opportunities of belief. The idea that everyone reading the Bumper book is not merely capable of plumbing the hidden depths of the magical world but has those depths within themselves is both encouraging and frightening, and it's interesting to consider more traditional expressions of storybook magic in light of the suggestion. If I believe I've been turned into a frog, and everyone else believes I've been turned into a frog, too, it is true that there is still a sense in which I am not a frog, but it may also be true that I have more pressing demands on my attention. (The Moores strictly proscribe attempting this sort of thing on your enemies.)
Alan Moore seems most interested in the liberating nature of shared imagination — for one thing, it makes material wealth universal. Take this passage, about the beauty of a sunrise, and its potentially transformative properties: "… the experiments of the alchemists of the Dark Ages … are, in fact, related, not to the transmutation of metals, but to the transmutation of the entire Universe … This method, or art, or science, or whatever we choose to call it (supposing it to exist, or to have ever existed), is simply concerned to restore the delights of the primal Paradise; to enable men, if they will, to inhabit a world of joy and splendor."
This quotation is neither from "The Great When" nor "The Moon and Serpent Bumper Book of Magic," nor even precisely from an Arthur Machen short story. It's a quotation in Machen's "N" from Rev. Thomas Hampole's "A London Walk," the imaginary book from the Machen story whose nonexistence starts Dennis Knuckleyard on his terrifying adventure. And perhaps that observation, in the right light, is radical enough to justify the hopes and fears of every monster, mobster, murderer and magician in "The Great When," though it's made up twice over.
PHOTO: Alan Moore (PHOTOGRAPH BY Joe Brown FOR THE NEW YORK TIMES)